The Association between Glaucoma and Dementia in a National Cohort of All of Us Participants

Purpose: To assess the association between glaucoma and its subtypes and incidence of dementia and its subtypes across APOE genotypes in the National Institutes of Health (NIH) All of Us Research Program. Design: Retrospective, longitudinal cohort study. Participants: A cohort of individuals with linked electronic health record (EHR) data in the All of Us dataset, with every individual with a glaucoma diagnosis matched with four control participants. Participants diagnosed with dementia before glaucoma were excluded. Methods: A 1:4 cohort of participants with glaucoma and control participants was created using a propensity score–matching design that considered age, race, ethnicity, and sex. Participants with whole-genome sequencing data were stratified by APOE genotype for sub-analyses. A multivariable Cox regression model was used to adjust for residual imbalance in comorbidities. Main Outcome Measures: Incidence of dementia and its subtypes. Results: Among the 393 497 All of Us participants with linked EHRs, we identified 9444 individuals (2.40%) with glaucoma diagnoses (excluding participants with diagnoses of dementia before glaucoma) and 37 776 matched controls without glaucoma. During the observation period (median, 6.5 years; interquartile range, 3.3–10.7 years), dementia was diagnosed in 1127 individuals (2.39%). Glaucoma was associated with a significantly increased risk of all-cause dementia (adjusted hazard ratio [aHR], 1.23; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.08–1.40), Alzheimer’s disease (aHR, 1.60; 95% CI, 1.26–2.02), and vascular dementia (aHR, 1.38; 95% CI, 1.04–1.83). Among glaucoma subtypes, primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG, N = 5756) and normal-tension glaucoma (NTG, N = 1106) were linked to an elevated risk of Alzheimer’s disease (POAG: aHR, 1.48, 95% CI, 1.11–1.96; NTG: aHR, 1.87, 95% CI, 1.09–3.18), whereas angle-closure glaucoma (N = 3150) showed no significant association (aHR, 1.49; 95% CI, 0.91–2.27). Glaucoma was associated with an increased risk of all-cause dementia across the three APOE genotypes assessed, (ε2ε3 &gt; ε3ε3 &gt; ε3ε4). Conclusions: Glaucoma was associated with a higher risk of dementia across APOE genotypes, with varying associations among glaucoma and dementia subtypes. Financial Disclosure(s): The author(s) have no proprietary or commercial interest in any materials discussed in this article.

Glaucoma and dementia are both neurodegenerative disorders with shared risk factors, 1 such as age and family history. 2 , 3 Glaucoma is the most common cause of irreversible blindness worldwide, resulting from the progressive degeneration of retinal ganglion cells. 4 , 5 Dementias are characterized by deficits in cognitive function, particularly in memory, language, and executive domain, which result in a decline in a person’s everyday functioning. 6 Given the common pathologic hallmarks of neurodegeneration and shared risk factors between these conditions, several studies have explored a potential link between glaucoma and dementia. The association between glaucoma and dementias has been a contested point for two decades. In 2002, a small chart review of 49 individuals with Alzheimer’s disease suggested that individuals with Alzheimer’s disease had an increased prevalence of glaucoma compared with the population prevalences. 7 Four years later, a Japanese study of approximately 360 patients with Alzheimer’s disease and age-matched controls described a higher prevalence of primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) in the patients with Alzheimer’s disease compared with age-matched controls. 8 The following year, 2007, a nationwide Danish case register linkage study found no increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease associated with glaucoma. 9 In the following decade, multiple national studies globally continued to report conflicting associations. A national retrospective cohort study using Medicare data from the United States found that POAG was associated with a decreased risk for dementias, including Alzheimer’s disease. 10 Retrospective analyses from a Taiwanese and a South Korean national health insurance database both found that POAG was associated with increased Alzheimer’s disease risk. 11 , 12 A subsequent analysis of the Taiwanese health insurance database found that normal-tension glaucoma (NTG) was associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease. 13 A national analysis of linked electronic health record (EHR) data from the English National Health Service did not find any association between POAG and Alzheimer’s disease. 14 A meta-analysis in 2019 found individuals with glaucoma or POAG had an increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease. 15 A 2021 meta-analysis, spanning more than 4.6 million participants, concluded that glaucoma was not associated with a higher incidence of dementia. 16 In contrast, multiple subsequent meta-analyses in 2023 17 – 19 and 2024 20 , 21 found that glaucoma was associated with an increased risk of cognitive impairment or dementia. Additional studies using data from a Swedish national cohort study, 22 a Taiwanese national database, 23 and a nationwide South Korean study 24 reported an association between glaucoma and an increased risk of dementia. On the other hand, a study of the United Kingdom Biobank cohort and a national French healthcare database found that glaucoma was not associated with increased dementia risk. 25 , 26 Additionally, studies with data from the California Medicare database 27 and the National Health and Aging Trends Study in the United States 28 reported a negative association and no association of glaucoma with dementia risk, respectively. Thus, any associations between glaucoma and dementia and their respective subtypes―particularly in the large, diverse population of the United States―remain unclear. Moreover, large, diverse population studies investigating glaucoma and dementia risk have not explicitly matched on genetic substructures within the cohorts, which could confound the results from previous studies. Both glaucoma and dementias can be subclassified. The most common forms of glaucoma are POAG and NTG, both characterized by an open angle of the anterior chamber, followed by angle-closure glaucoma (ACG). 29 , 30 Most dementia subtypes, including Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia, are neurodegenerative disorders characterized by hallmark misfolded proteins. 31 Additionally, vascular dementia is a common dementia subtype, often the result of ischemic or hemorrhagic insult in the brain. 32 Given their distinct pathophysiologies, risk associations between the different subtypes of dementia and glaucoma need to be dissected. Shared genetic risk factors between glaucoma and dementia have been suggested. 33 , 34 The strongest genetic risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease is the apolipoprotein E ( APOE ) ε4 allele, 35 and the ε2 allele is protective relative to the ε3 allele. 36 Large-scale biobank studies have not found associations of APOE alleles with glaucoma diagonoses. 37 , 38 The APOE ε4 allele has been associated with a faster rate of macular ganglion cell–inner plexiform layer thinning on OCT in NTG eyes. 39 However, whether APOE genotypes modify the relationship between glaucoma and dementia risk in large, diverse populations remains unknown. Our study investigates the association between glaucoma and its subtypes with dementia and its subtypes in a large diverse nationwide cohort, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) All of Us 40 study. By leveraging the whole-genome sequencing data in All of Us , our study also matches on genetic similarity and examines whether the strongest genetic risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease, APOE genotype, modifies the association between glaucoma and dementia. Methods All of Us Study Participants The NIH All of Us Research Program 40 aims to include 1 million US residents through a nationwide recruitment network. Participants can elect to share their physical measurements, EHRs, and survey data. Data (v8) from the NIH All of Us Research Program from any participants with a linked EHR were analyzed. Secondary use of public, de-identified participant data was deemed exempt from the University of Pennsylvania Institutional Review Board approval, and the analyses adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. The requirement for informed consent was waived because of the retrospective nature of the study. Diagnoses and Dementia Risk Factors Participants were classified for different diagnoses based on Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine terms and International Classification of Diseases 9 th and 10 th Revision codes ( Table S1 , available at www.aaojournal.org and https://github.com/kp2657/glaucoma-dementia ). Specifically, the Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine code for POAG was 77075001; NTG, 50485007; ACG, 33647009; pigmentary glaucoma, 46168003; and pseudoexfoliation glaucoma, 111514006. Here, “Any glaucoma” included POAG, NTG, ACG, pigmentary glaucoma, and pseudoexfoliation glaucoma, because this enables comparison with past studies 24 , 26 that considered secondary glaucoma subtypes within any-cause glaucoma. Because the outcome of interest was dementia diagnosis, we focus on identifying confounders that are known risk factors of dementia. We considered risk factors for dementia identified by the Lancet Commission on dementia 2 and two additional risk factors from the McCance Brain Care Score 41 not defined by the Lancet Commission (stress and meaning in life). The risk factors of less education, smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, stress, and meaning in life were assessed with survey data responses from the All of Us study ( Table S2 , available at www.aaojournal.org ). Comorbidities that were identified as risk factors by the Lancet Commission―hypertension, depression, obesity, traumatic brain injury, diabetes, hearing loss, and high low-density lipoprotein cholesterol―were defined as a positive self-identification on the survey or diagnoses found in the EHR ( Table S2 , available at www.aaojournal.org ). Risk factors for dementia that were not captured by the available survey data included physical inactivity, air pollution, social isolation, and untreated visual impairment; thus, these risk factors were not considered in the analyses. Finally, we also used survey data to assess for healthcare use ( Table S2 , available at www.aaojournal.org ) to guard against ascertainment bias, given the reliance on EHR data here. The demographics and comorbidities of the cohort are reported in Table 3 . Additional survey data for risk factors are reported in Table S2 (available at www.aaojournal.org ). Cohort Construction and Covariate Selection A propensity score–matching strategy with greedy matching and a caliper distance equaling 20% of the standard deviation of the propensity score (caliper: 0.0047) was used to create a control group. Individuals aged more than 40 years with linked EHRs were filtered to remove those who had a diagnosis of dementia before a diagnosis of glaucoma (N = 99), and those with a glaucoma diagnosis were identified. Each of the 9444 identified participants with a glaucoma diagnosis was matched with 4 control individuals, resulting in a control cohort of 37 776 ( Fig S1 , available at www.aaojournal.org ). For the primary cohort, covariates used for propensity score matching were race, ethnicity, sex at birth, and age at cutoff date of the All of Us v8 (October 1, 2023). Controls were rejected if a dementia diagnosis was recorded before their matched case index date, and the next closest match was used. Table S4 shows the demographic and comorbidities before propensity score matching, and Table 3 shows the data for the cohort with the matched controls. To help control for these covariates as potential confounders, as well as undiagnosed glaucoma in the control dataset, three additional cohorts were formed by the same procedure for sensitivity analysis. The first cohort used answers to the survey question “What is the total number visits to an eye doctor that you made in the last 12 months?” as a matching factor for propensity score matching. The second cohort was restricted to individuals who had reported visiting an eye doctor at least once in the last year to construct the cohort. Because 1485 individuals within the glaucoma cases had more than one subtype of glaucoma diagnosis, a third cohort was formed by excluding individuals with diagnoses of multiple glaucoma subtypes to select cases, and then controls were matched as with the other cohorts. Finally, another cohort was created with individuals with whole-genome sequencing data for APOE genotype stratification analyses. In addition to the previously used factors of race, ethnicity, sex at birth, and age, the propensity score matching included the first 10 principal components of genetic ancestry as covariates to select controls to match the population substructure in the cases and constructed controls. APOE Genotyping and Modification Analyses Cohort participants with whole-genome sequencing data were analyzed for the APOE genotype as previously described. 37 , 42 Of the 9444 cases in the primary cohort, 3623 had whole-genome sequencing data available for analysis. A total of 14 492 controls were matched as described above and genotyped for APOE . In brief, genotypes at two single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs429358 and rs7412) were extracted and then converted to the three different APOE alleles: ε2, ε3, and ε4, with genotypes of ε2ε2, ε2ε3, ε2ε4, ε3ε3, ε3ε4, and ε4ε4. To test if APOE genotype modified the association between glaucoma and dementia, a glaucoma × APOE genotype term was added to the model and assessed for significance. In the first approach, the APOE genotype was defined as an ordinal series with ε2/ε2&lt;ε2/ε3&lt;ε3/ε3&lt;ε2/ε4&lt;ε3/ε4&lt;ε4/ε4. In the second approach, APOE genotype was stratified into APOEε4 carriers and APOEε4 noncarriers. Statistical Analysis Hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated with a Cox proportional hazards model for associations of all-cause dementia with glaucoma. The model was adjusted by residual unbalanced covariates (Cohen’s h &gt; 0.05) including hypertension, obesity, depression, traumatic brain injury, type 2 diabetes, and difficulty hearing. For Cox regression analysis, the index date was defined as the date of glaucoma diagnosis for each case and their 4 corresponding controls. The observation period ended at the earliest diagnosis of dementia or the cutoff date of the All of Us v8 (October 1, 2023). Because of the matched data structure of the propensity score–matched cohort construction, all multivariable Cox regressions were adjusted by clustering matched sets―a glaucoma case and their four matched controls―using the robust sandwich estimator for standard errors. 43 These statistical analyses were performed using Python in the All of Us workbench. These analyses were performed for glaucoma subtypes and dementia subtypes, and only results with &gt;20 individuals are reported as per All of Us policies. Results Among the All of Us participants with linked EHRs, 9444 individuals had a glaucoma diagnosis ( Table S5 , available at www.aaojournal.org ), excluding participants with diagnoses of dementia before glaucoma (N = 99). All 9444 were successfully matched to four controls using propensity score matching, resulting in 37 776 matched controls without glaucoma ( Fig S1 , available at www.aaojournal.org ). Among 47 220 individuals in the cohort, dementia was diagnosed in 1063 individuals (2.25%) during the observation period (median, 6.5 years; interquartile range, 3.3–10.7 years). A total of 305 individuals with glaucoma (3.2%) and 822 control individuals (2.2%) were diagnosed with dementia. Overall, when comparing with controls matched on race, ethnicity, sex, and age, glaucoma was associated with a significantly higher risk of all-cause dementia (adjusted hazard ratio [aHR], 1.23; 95% CI, 1.08–1.40), Alzheimer’s disease (aHR, 1.60; 95% CI, 1.26–2.02), and vascular dementia (aHR, 1.38; 95% CI, 1.04–1.83) ( Table 6 ). When considering the different subtypes of glaucoma, POAG was associated with an increased risk of all-cause dementia (aHR, 1.19; 95% CI, 1.02–1.39) and Alzheimer’s disease (aHR, 1.48, 95% CI, 1.11–1.96), but not vascular dementia (aHR, 1.25; 95% CI, 0.89–1.77). Angle-closure glaucoma was associated with an increased risk of dementia (aHR, 1.31; 95% CI, 1.03–1.67), but not Alzheimer’s disease (aHR, 1.49; 95% CI, 0.91–2.37). Normaltension glaucoma was associated with Alzheimer’s disease (aHR, 1.87; 95% CI, 1.09–3.18), but not all-cause dementia (aHR, 1.29; 95% CI, 0.90–1.84) ( Table 6 ). Next, three sensitivity analyses considered the self-reported number of recent eye doctor visits for case-control cohort construction and excluded individuals with diagnoses of multiple glaucoma subtypes to test the previously found associations ( Tables S7 – S11 , available at www.aaojournal.org ). In the first sensitivity analysis, matching controls to cases including self-reported eye doctor visits, all associations between any glaucoma and dementia and its subtypes survived: glaucoma with all-cause dementia (aHR, 1.16; 95% CI, 1.01–1.34), with Alzheimer’s disease (aHR, 1.63; 95% CI, 1.28–2.07), and with vascular dementia (aHR, 1.42; 95% CI, 1.06–1.89). Among the subtypes of glaucoma, the association of POAG with Alzheimer’s disease (aHR, 1.73; 95% CI, 1.28–2.34) and NTG with Alzheimer’s disease (aHR, 2.48; 95% CI, 1.43–4.30) survived. No association between ACG and dementia risk survived ( Table S8 , available at www.aaojournal.org ). Second, a sensitivity analysis was performed wherein the cohort was limited to those who had reported having seen an eye doctor within the last year (N = 3623 glaucoma cases and N = 14 492 controls). The association between any glaucoma with increased risk of all-cause dementia (aHR, 1.44; 95% CI, 1.08–1.92) and the association between POAG with increased risk of all-cause dementia (aHR, 1.55; 95% CI, 1.11–2.17) both survived ( Table S10 , available at www.aaojournal.org ). Finally, when comparing only individuals with a glaucoma diagnosis of only a single subtype with matched controls, a diagnosis of any glaucoma (aHR, 1.51; 95% CI, 1.14–2.02) or POAG (aHR, 1.50; 95% CI, 1.04–2.17) was associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease, but not all-cause dementia ( Table S11 , available at www.aaojournal.org ). Next, a cohort of individuals with whole-genome sequencing data who were matched on genetic similarity were analyzed for the association between glaucoma, and POAG specifically, with dementia and its subtypes ( Table 12 and S13 , available at www.aaojournal.org ). A diagnosis of glaucoma (aHR, 1.49;.org 95% CI, 1.15–1.92) or POAG (aHR, 1.43; 95% CI, 1.11–1.96) was associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease in the cohort matched on genetic similarity. Finally, APOE genotype was assessed as a modifier between the association of glaucoma and dementia. The distributions of APOE genotypes were similar between glaucoma cases and a control cohort matched by race, ethnicity, sex at birth, and age, and the first 10 principal components of genetic ancestry (chi-square test P value = 0.18; Tables S13 and S14 , available at www.aaojournal.org ). Within the matched cohort, the incidence of both all-cause dementia and Alzheimer’s disease significantly varied with APOE genotype, but glaucoma and POAG percentages did not ( Table S13 , available at www.aaojournal.org ). Across APOE genotypes, glaucoma was associated with a higher risk of all-cause dementia across all 3 genotypes: ε2ε3 (aHR, 1.76; 95% CI, 1.11–2.79), ε3ε3 (aHR, 1.45; 95% CI, 1.19–1.75), and ε3ε4 (aHR, 1.43; 95% CI, 1.09–1.87) ( Fig 2 and Table S15 , available at www.aaojournal.org ). Moreover, glaucoma was associated with a higher risk of Alzheimer’s disease across all genotypes with enough individuals to report (&gt;20): ε3/ε3 (aHR, 1.80; 95% CI, 1.27–2.54) and ε3/ε4 (aHR, 1.59; 95% CI, 1.00–2.51). In two approaches to formally test if APOE genotype modified the association between glaucoma and all-cause dementia, adding a glaucoma × APOE genotype term, no significant interaction was found between glaucoma and all-cause dementia in both approaches, where the APOE genotype was considered as a series wherein ε2/ε2&lt;ε2/ε3&lt;ε3/ε3&lt;ε2/ε4&lt;ε3/ε4&lt;ε4/ε4 ( P = 0.62) or as a stratification factor by the presence of the APOEε4 allele ( P = 0.69). Discussion In this study, we investigated potential associations between glaucoma and dementia risk both broadly and stratified by glaucoma and dementia subtypes. In participants from the nationwide NIH All of Us Research Program, glaucoma was associated with an increased risk of dementia using a demographically matched control cohort and adjusting for comorbidities. Our results align with previous meta-analyses that demonstrated an association between glaucoma and dementia risk. 17 – 21 Notably, a previous meta-analysis that stratified by geographic location concluded that although glaucoma is associated with dementia risk in Asia, an association in Europe or North America regions is not supported. Specifically in the United States, studies have concluded positive, 44 , 45 negative, 10 , 27 , 46 , 47 and no associations 28 , 48 between glaucoma and dementia risk. The study here differs in that it combines nationwide data to capture a wide range of individuals and uses propensity score matching with adjustments for imbalanced dementia risk factors to control for confounding factors. 49 Moreover, the study leverages the whole-genome sequencing data in the All of Us dataset to explicitly match controls to cases on genetic similarity, helping to account for potential genetic confounders across the diverse populations represented in this nationwide study. Through these series of analyses using demographic, risk factor, and genetic matching, alongside statistical adjustment of confounding dementia risk factors through multivariable modeling, our study reports that in the United States, a glaucoma diagnosis was associated with an increased risk of dementia, particularly POAG with Alzheimer’s disease. In addition to using participant survey data to capture, assess, and control when necessary for imbalanced dementia risk factors, such as smoking and alcohol consumption, survey data were used to control for healthcare access. Additionally, because glaucoma can be diagnosed only by ophthalmologists and is asymptomatic in the early stage of disease, glaucoma diagnoses may be correlated with preventive healthcare use and health-seeking behavior. Thus, survey data were used to perform additional sensitivity analyses to control for healthcare access and undiagnosed glaucoma among controls. Sensitivity analyses reaffirmed the significantly higher risk of all-cause dementia in individuals with POAG. Within the subtype analyses, the greatest increased risk was observed with POAG for Alzheimer’s disease (aHR, 1.48; 95% CI, 1.11–1.96), stronger than POAG and all-cause dementia (aHR, 1.19, 95% CI, 1.02–1.39). Likewise, NTG was not associated with an increased risk of all-cause dementia, but only Alzheimer’s disease (aHR, 1.97; 95% CI, 1.14–3.40). Studies have pointed to OPTINEURIN as a common shared genetic risk factor for both Alzheimer’s disease and NTG. 50 , 51 We did not find that POAG or NTG was associated with vascular dementia. Moreover, ACG is driven primarily by the deficiencies in anterior chamber flow, and the weak association with all-cause dementia did not survive sensitivity analyses. The greatest statistical strength being in the association between POAG and Alzheimer’s disease and the past literature on how POAG and Alzheimer’s disease share neurodegenerative mechanisms in common 52 support that the overlap between glaucoma and dementia risk is most strongly driven by POAG and Alzheimer’s disease. Altogether, the results suggest the associations are not driven purely by the vision loss that is shared across subtypes of glaucoma but share common risk factors or disease mechanisms. Because APOE genotype is the largest genetic risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease, 53 the study here leveraged the whole-genome sequencing data in the All of Us study Research Program to stratify the analysis by APOE genotype and found that across all APOE genotypes, there was a consistent association between glaucoma and dementia and glaucoma and Alzheimer’s disease. These data suggest that the APOE genotype does not modify the relationship between glaucoma and dementia risk. However, the low sample size may limit our ability to detect whether the APOE genotype modifies the risk relationship between glaucoma and dementia. The data cannot yet comment on whether the APOE genotype modifies the relationship between subtypes of glaucoma―POAG in particular―and Alzheimer’s disease risk nor can the data comment on the relationship between glaucoma and dementia risk in individuals with ε2/ε2 and ε4/ε4 genotypes because of the rarity of the ε2/ε2 and ε4/ε4 genotypes, each comprising &lt;1% to 3% of the population. 37 We envision that future releases of the All of Us data and analyses of other datasets will enable robust sensitivity analyses to be performed on the associated risk of glaucoma or POAG with Alzheimer’s disease. Limitations Although the study combined linked EHR data, survey responses, and whole-genome sequencing data to perform a statistically controlled retrospective cohort analysis, the reliance on EHR for diagnosis can be limiting. Although the study leveraged self-reported healthcare access, for both glaucoma and dementia, underdiagnosis and capture by the EHR are common. The fact that some participants of the All of Us study did not receive regular eye care is a limitation because reduced eye care access or use could lead to underdiagnoses or misdiagnoses of glaucoma, which could bias the evaluation of association between glaucoma and dementia. Moreover, a longer observation period will be needed to assess for longer-term risk. Finally, integrated datasets detailing the severity of glaucoma and extent of glaucomatous damage and severity of dementia and neurodegenerative changes over time could powerfully clarify the dynamics and timing of the association between glaucoma and dementia. Supplementary Material Supplementary Figure 1 Table S1 Tables S2, S4, S5, S7-11, S13-15 Supplemental material available at www.aaojournal.org .