An Immuno-Infrared Sensor Detects Preclinical Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s Disease by Protein Misfolding

The immuno-infrared sensor (iRS) detects misfolding of biomarker proteins in blood and provides thereby a very early and easily accessible diagnosis of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. Only in early stages recently approved therapeutic Alzheimer′s drugs work efficiently. In symptom-free stages, lifestyle change can largely delay the disease progression, and the drugs may even block the disease progression. Population screening by a simple blood test will therefore be a game changer in the fight against neurodegenerative diseases. This was made possible by the new iRS platform. In the iRS platform, antibodies as catcher molecules concentrate the target protein biomarker on the functionalized attenuated total reflection crystal surface. A blocking layer prevents unspecific binding. A quantum cascade laser is used to measure the amide I absorbance maximum as a readout, indicating the degree of the biomarker misfolding and thereby disease progression.

Very early diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is crucial for the successful application of therapeutic drugs, which have recently received FDA approval. AD starts in a symptom-free stage characterized by the misfolding of amyloid beta (Aβ) peptides from alpha helical/random coil secondary-structures to the β-sheet. This conformational change leads first to oligomer formation, then to larger fibrils, and ultimately to macroscopic amyloid plaques in the brain ( Figure a). Typical clinical symptoms only emerge at late stages when brain damage is largely irreversible, and therapeutic response is therefore limited. Hence, the development of early-stage blood-based biomarkers remains a significant unmet medical need. 1 The iRs concept: (a) progression of Alzheimer’s disease: in the preclinical stage, misfolding of Aβ leads first to oligomers and later to fibrils. Finally, Aβ is deposited in amyloid plaques, which can be visualized by PET scanning. The Aβ plaques indicate the clinical stage of Alzheimer’s disease. (b) Aβ Monomers (healthy), oligomers (at high risk), and fibrils (diseased) can be distinguished by their respective infrared absorbance maxima. Amide I maximum shifts from 1652 cm –1 (monomers) to 1630 cm –1 (oligomers) to 1624 cm –1 (fibrils). (c) Functionalized surface with blocking layer, covalently attached by linker L 1 to silane covering the ATR-crystal surface and catcher antibodies covalently attached to the blocking layer via Linker L 2 . We have demonstrated that the initial Aβ misfolding in blood can indicate quantitative AD risk during the preclinical, symptom-free stage. − The misfolding of Aβ is measurable from blood or cerebral fluid (CSF) with a novel optical biosensor, the immuno-infrared sensor (iRS). In contrast, currently established biomarkers measure the reduction of Aβ concentration in body fluids much later during the symptomatic clinical stages. Due to the accumulation of Aβ in nonsoluble amyloid plaques in the brain, their concentration decreases in external body fluids. In addition, Aβ aggregation triggers the phosphorylation of p-Tau217, another blood-based biomarker that also appears even later when the effectiveness of drugs is already limited to less than 30%. Thus, the unmet medical need for very early risk classification is now addressed by the iRS assay, which analyzes initial misfolding at a preclinical stage rather than the later concentration drop at the clinical stage measured by established concentration biomarkers. Misfolding is also observed in Parkinson’s disease (PD). In this case, alpha-synuclein misfolds to oligomers and fibrils, which are deposited in Lewy bodies, the hallmark of PD. Today, the PD diagnosis is mostly based on motor symptoms and prone to errors when symptoms overlap. Early biological classification by a biomarker is an urgent unmet medical need for a precise therapy to relieve symptoms and, in the future, for early therapeutic intervention, when drugs become available. The iRS Concept The new infrared spectroscopy-based iRS platform enables early quantitation of Aβ misfolding in blood and CSF by overcoming key challenges inherent in traditional infrared spectroscopy. In the early studies, conventional Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) instruments with weak, broadband light sources were used. But for the clinical applications, scalability by parallel measurements in a miniaturized apparatus is a prerequisite. Therefore, in the next generation of iRS, quantum cascade lasers (QCLs) , are used with intense, small diameter IR beams. A fundamental challenge in mid-IR analysis is detecting the secondary structure sensitive amide I absorbance band of very low concentration biomarkers amidst a strong background absorbance from water. An amide I band at 1652 cm –1 corresponds to α-helical or random coil structures, while a down shift indicates misfolding to β-sheet structures ( Figure b). Overlapping water absorbancespecifically the OH bending vibration near 1640 cm –1 is several orders of magnitude larger, complicating detection. This is mitigated by attenuated total reflection (ATR) spectroscopy, where the evanescent IR wave penetrates only a ∼500 nm thin surface layer of the fluid sample flown over the ATR crystal ( Figure c) reducing largely the water background absorbance. Difference spectroscopy then precisely subtracts the water background, isolating the biomarker signal ( Figure ). The difference spectrum before (1) and after capture (2) of the biomarker from a body fluid provides the absorbance maximum of the biomarker as a readout. The background absorbance of all surface-bound molecules including water cancels out the difference. The maximum of the amide I band indicates at 1652 cm –1 mostly monomers for healthy individuals and in this example at 1624 cm –1 mostly fibrils for diseased. During progression of the disease, the band downshifts by misfolding from monomers to oligomers and fibrils in the symptom-free stage, indicating a high risk for a later clinical diagnosis. 2 Structural sensitive amide I band maximum: The infrared-spectrum of the antigen is obtained by taking the aborbance-difference after (2) and before (1) the binding of the antigen. The amide I absorbance reflects the secondary structure composition of the antigen. The lower the maximum of the amide I band the higher the misfolding. The approach of infrared difference spectroscopy has already proven successful in time-resolved FTIR studies investigating protein reaction mechanisms at atomic resolution. , The expertise obtained in time-resolved infrared spectroscopy of proteins was key in overcoming the challenges in the development of the iRS. Subsequently, this approach was successfully proven to work in an ATR setup to reveal minor signals in a large water background. Covalent Surface Modification To ensure that only the biomarker is captured and concentrated on the ATR surface, it is functionalized with target-specific capture moleculeshere, antibodies ( Figure c). These antibodies selectively concentrate the biomarker within the thin IR-probed layer, conferring to the sensor the specificity and sensitivity of the capture antibody. However, unspecific binding of other fluid components would also generate absorbance, which is indistinguishable from specific signals. To overcome this, we developed a biorthogonal surface chemistry that blocks nonspecific adsorption and covalently binds antibodies. This surface functionalization is a key innovation of the iRS assay ( Figure ). All biochemical reaction steps during functionalization are monitored in real time by IR spectroscopy to ensure reproducibility and consistent quality control. Figure a shows the chemical steps for the preparation of the iRS surface and Figure b shows the complete surface. − First, the silicon ATR crystal is cleaned and polished, and the surface is oxidized in a plasma cleaner to obtain a silicon oxide layer. In the following attachment step, triethoxysilane-based linker molecules 1 are attached to this layer. The ethoxy groups are hydrolyzed under defined conditions to form reactive silanols that can condense on the surface of the oxidized silicone. As a second reactive group, linker molecule 1 has an azide group. The latter can be used for strain-promoted click chemistry , with the second linker molecule 2, which has an aza-dibenzocyclooctyne (DBCO) moiety. The second reactive group of 2 is N-hydoxysuccinimide (NHS). This group is reactive to primary amines, as found in peptides within the lysine side chains and the N-terminus. The reaction with partially lysed casein, which is commonly used for noncovalent blocking, results here in a covalent blocking layer. Next, this blocking layer must be functionalized. Again, a linker with NHS (3) is used to covalently attach the linker to further amine groups of the blocking layer. The second functional group of linker 3 is again an azide. This azide can be used for click chemistry with DBCO. To immobilize antibodies, they must be modified with DBCO, e.g., by attaching another NHS-DBCO linker (4) to an amine group or by using maleimido-DBCO for attachment to a cysteine residue. To achieve good solubility and flexibility, and to avoid hydrophobic regions prone to unspecific binding, the two reactive groups of each linker molecule should be separated by several PEG groups. The resulting surface ( Figure b) is stable because all of the molecules are covalently bound, and the complete blocking layer effectively prevents unspecific binding. 3 Stepwise functionalization of the ATR surface: (a) Initially, the ATR surface is coated with a triethoxysilane layer, followed by attachment of a blocking layer via the linker 2 . A second linker binds the capture antibody to this blocking layer. This results in the surface shown in panel (b), where both the blocking layer and the antibody are covalently bound to the ATR crystal. Body Fluid Measurement with a QCL-Based IRS Instrument The performance of the QCL-based iRS is shown in Figures and . For surface functionalization and measurements of body fluids, we developed a fluidic system with an advanced flow chamber as an exchangeable disposable positioned on top of the ATR-crystal surface to allow precise, reproducible fluid handling. Currently, four channels on two ATR crystals can be measured in parallel. During measurement, the disposable is first filled with buffer to record the background absorbance of the functionalized surface and water. Then, the body fluid sample flows over the surface, selectively capturing the biomarker. Subtraction of the dominant background reveals the amide I and amide II bands of the biomarker ( Figure ). The amide I frequency provides a readout of the secondary structure distribution, while the amide II band relates to the biomarker concentration. Figure a shows the kinetics of the amide II band during antibody immobilization. The amide II band indicates the amount of antibody bound to the surface within a few minutes. After antibody binding, a buffer washes off noncovalently absorbed antibodies from the surface. Finally, the absorbance of the amide II band is very similar in all four channels, indicating a very similar amount of antibody covalently bound on the surface. Amide I and II bands of the catcher antibody in four different channels on two different crystals are shown in Figure b. In the next step, the body fluids are flushed over the surface. In the resulting difference spectra ( Figure c,d) amide I and II bands of a PD (Parkinson disease) CSF sample and a DC (disease control) CSF sample reflect the binding of alpha-synuclein on the surface. The amide I band of the DC sample has an absorbance maximum at 1643.1 cm –1 while the maximum of the PD sample amide I band is at 1638.2 cm –1 as expected for controls and PD patients, respectively. 4 Results of a typical iRS measurement: (a) Kinetics of the amide II band during antibody immobilization in 4 different channels. After antibody binding, a buffer washes off for about 40 min noncovalently absorbed antibody from the surface. The amide II band indicates the amount of antibody bound to the surface. (b) Amide I and II bands of the catcher antibody in four different channels on two different crystals. (c) Amide I and II bands of a PD (Parkinson disease) CSF sample and a DC (disease control) CSF sample measured with the QCL-based iRS. They reflect the binding of alpha-synuclein on the surface. All spectra were normalized by scaling the amide I band to an intensity value of 1. (d) Enlarged view of the amide I band maximum of the PD and DC spectra, respectively. The lower maximum for the PD sample indicates increased misfolding of alpha-synuclein compared to the DC sample. Study subjects gave their informed consent, and study approval was obtained by the local ethics committee and institutional review board (IRB Vote from Landesärztekammer Hessen: FF89/2008 and FF38/2016) in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. 5 S/N of FTIR and QCL-based iRS instruments. The FTIR data shown in panel (a) were obtained with a resolution of 2 cm –1 . For the QCL data shown in panel (b), a moving average over 10 points was applied, also resulting in a 2 cm –1 spectral resolution. Background and sample spectra were measured for 20 s each. The root-mean-square (RMS) noise was evaluated in the spectral region from 1610 to 1690 cm –1 , the amide I and OH bending absorbance region. The obtained RMS is 3.1 × 10 –5 for the FTIR (a) and 2.5 × 10 –5 for the QCL system (b). Comparison of FTIR and QCL-Based iRS Instruments Figure compares the signal-to-noise ratio of an FTIR-based instrument with a globar as the light source and a QCL-based iRS instrument. For this purpose, a difference spectrum of water was measured with both setups under the same conditions. In the amide I region at around 1650 cm –1 , the noise is mainly influenced by the large background absorbance of the bending vibration of water. The root-mean-square (RMS) of the noise in this region is 2.5 × 10 –5 for the QCL and 3.1 × 10 –5 for the FTIR system. The noise in the OH bending region was reduced by dynamic calibration of the QCL system. In this mode, the laser intensity is increased in the spectral region of the larger background absorbance of H 2 O. This provides an improved S/N in the crucial amide I spectral region of the QCL-based iRS spectra. Such dynamic calibration cannot be performed in an FTIR instrument and provides an additional advantage of the QCL system. This is the first example that the QCL outperforms an FTIR instrument, indicating the great potential of QCLs. In contrast to FTIR-based iRS, the QCL-based iRS now allows significant upscaling of the measurements by miniaturization and simultaneous measurements using intense QLC lasers and array detectors. The upscaling is an important prerequisite for population screening in a prevention test. The iRS instrument is shown in detail in Figure . 6 QCL-based iRS system: a fully automated CE-certified iRS instrument consisting of a QCL laser, IR-beam optics, and detector in the lower compartment and a microfluidic system in the upper compartment. (b) Microfluidic interface in an open state (the upper part is also seen in blue in panel (a)). The disposable is inserted between the upper and lower parts and connected to the advanced fluidic system. (c) Top view of the disposable with four input chambers for the body fluid samples. On the bottom view of the four-sample chamber (orange), two crystals, each with two channels, can be mounted to flow the body fluids over the functionalized crystal surfaces. The reflection mirror into the crystals is mounted on a stage to address the four channels, respectively. Also, the detector can be aligned automatically. Current Applications of the iRS In a large population-based cohort, blood plasma samples from a subset of 10,000 participants were analyzed. The iRS assay predicted clinical AD risk up to 17 years before clinical onset during the symptom-free stage, achieving an area under the curve (AUC) of up to 0.82. , In a cohort with subjective cognitive declined subjects, it predicted conversion to clinical AD 6 years in advance with an AUC of 0.94 in blood plasma. More recently, the iRS platform is extended to Parkinson’s disease by detecting misfolded α-synuclein in cerebrospinal fluid. In a discovery and independent validation study, sensitivity and specificity were 94 and 97%, respectively. Recently, the iRS is even used for blood samples with an AUC of 0.94, providing 87% sensitivity and 97% specificity. Currently, the iRS platform is applied in clinical studies to monitor therapeutic drug effects under GCLP conditions (Good Clinical Laboratory Procedures). The test can be used for a more precise biological classification instead of the symptomatic diagnosis in the clinic for more precise symptomatic treatment to relieve the symptoms. A feasibility study also classified ALS by detecting misfolded TDP-43 in CSF. Developing a preventive blood screening test for AD and PD accessible for the general population represents the final goal. Beyond proteopathies, the iRS has broad potential for chemical and biochemical process and quality control applications. Comparison with Established Diagnostics Alzheimer’s Disease Clinical AD is today very well diagnosed by an Aβ 42/40 ratio concentration biomarker measured in CSF. The lumbar puncture to obtain CSF is invasive. An alternative is PET scanning, which is more precise and requires an advanced expensive apparatus. Neither approach can be used for the population screening of the elderly population. However, a cheaper and more accessible blood test will democratize AD diagnosis in the future. The Aβ 42/40 ratio has recently been established in blood plasma but appears to be less robust than the CSF ratio. A more promising blood-based biomarker for the clinical stage is the p-tau 217 concentration biomarker. − This biomarker is currently the focus of many clinical studies. However, p-tau 217 indicates only clinical stages, and its performance drops significantly in the preclinical stage, in contrast to the structure biomarker. For preclinical risk determination, the structural biomarker is clearly superior to the pTau 217 biomarker (EMBO Molecular Medicine under review). A combination of the pTau 217 marker and the misfolding marker could already provide high throughput for very early stages, such as subjective cognitive decline. In this case, the pTau 217 test can screen a large number of samples, and in the next step, the iRS measures the positive tests with higher accuracy. Parkinson’s Disease In PD, the diagnosis of today is mostly based on motor symptoms mostly. There is an unmet medical need for a biological classification as discussed in the literature. , Today symptomatic therapies can relieve symptoms, but they need a precise diagnosis for the best performance. Promising results are obtained by seeding assays indicating misfolded alpha-synuclein. In cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), αSyn seed amplification assays (SAAs) have demonstrated high diagnostic accuracy for detecting pathological αSyn conformers in clinically diagnosed PD patients, supporting the concept that misfolding in CSF reflects central nervous system pathology. − However, SAAs only provide a binary result and cannot reflect the continuum between healthy and diseased. They also face challenges in standardization and depend strongly on assay conditions and the substrate. No published blood-based study has achieved successful independent validation, and reproducibility issues have been identified by the community. Future Directions There has been a breakthrough in AD therapies, and promising therapeutic drugs are in the pipeline for PD. Currently, the iRS-instruments are used to validate new drugs for pharmaceutical companies, especially new PD therapies. Clinical studies show that the earlier intervention provides a much better therapy window. In addition, lifestyle changes can delay the progression by several years. Prevention during the symptom-free or subjective cognitive declined stage seems the key in the fight against Alzheimer’s. This will not only reduce the burden for the diseased person and its family but also alleviate some of the challenges for our healthcare system. To provide prevention, in the blood screening test for the elderly population over 60 years of age, for whom the risk increases exponentially, the structure biomarker must obtain an IVDR ( in vitro diagnostic regulation) certificate in Europe and FDA approval in the U.S. For population screening, the throughput must be significantly increased. In this regard, the QCL-based iRS plays a crucial role. This enables parallel measurements and allows miniaturization of the instruments as well as the ATR crystal for a much larger throughput. Finally, the iRS Instruments will be used in clinical laboratories to analyze blood samples submitted by neurologists or even general practitioners. This will finally contribute to the longevity of our aging Western society.