Next-generation replication-defective HSV vectors for delivery of large DNA payloads

The application of gene therapy to the treatment of human disease with complex etiology and pathology will often require the delivery of large payloads exceeding 10 kbp in size. This is generally not possible with the most popular vectors such as adeno-associated viruses (AAVs), lentiviruses (LVs), retroviruses (RVs), and many nonviral delivery systems. There is a high likelihood that the correction of many human gene defects such as those associated with neurodegenerative diseases and inflammatory processes will require single large genes or complex genetic payloads that will often necessitate precise regulatory control of the specificity, timing, and duration of corrective gene expression. The regulation of cellular gene products typically depends on genomic promoter systems and splicing-driven transcription variants, necessitating a delivery vector with substantial payload capacity. Replication-defective herpes simplex virus (rdHSV) mutants lack at least one essential viral gene product and are propagated in host cells that supply the missing gene product. This review explores next-generation rdHSV vectors, which do not express viral genes, offer high payload capacity, and can be engineered for safe, long-term transgene expression. These advanced vectors enable the correction of complex diseases affecting neurons and other tissues, paving the way for large or intricate gene replacement strategies.

Introduction Current gene therapy applications primarily target genetic disorders requiring smaller payloads, where adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector-based gene delivery has contributed significantly to the development of several US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved products. At least 11 of these therapies have been commercialized. 1 Thus far, significant efforts have been devoted to developing various AAV capsid variants designed for more selective transduction of specific cell types and tissues. However, these advancements have not significantly improved the efficiency of gene delivery to target tissues, often requiring the administration of a very large number of particles to patients. 2 , 3 The remarkable success of these engineered vectors is tempered by several challenges. These challenges include the exclusion of patients with preexisting immunity to the vector, the high proportion of empty capsids in clinical-grade vector preparations, 4 and the prolonged persistence of vector particle components. This persistence can trigger immune responses such as anti-viral antibody production, antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity, and T cell responses, which may limit long-term transgene expression and hinder the possibility of repeat dosing. AAV vectors also have limited payload capacity (4.7 kbp), but for many rare diseases, a therapeutic cDNA can be inserted into the small-sized AAV capsid. For larger payloads, the strategy has been to create mini-gene constructs (e.g., micro-dystrophin) that fit into the AAV capsid. 5 , 6 However, this approach is challenging because minigenes often lack essential domains required for normal protein function and cannot retain cellular regulatory sequences (e.g., insulators, enhancers) necessary to maintain active chromatin for sustained gene expression. Recently developed replication-defective herpes simplex virus (rdHSV) vectors are an attractive vehicle alternative that can meet the challenge of large payload delivery, currently accommodating at least 35 kbp of foreign DNA. rdHSV vectors are defective in at least one viral gene product essential for lytic replication, and they are grown in cells expressing the missing gene products in trans. Even larger payloads are possible using HSV amplicons that can accommodate ∼150 kbp of foreign DNA. HSV amplicon genomes are stripped of all viral coding sequences but retain an HSV origin of replication and packaging signals required for their incorporation into capsids, which are produced by a helper virus in the same cell during production. Amplicon technology has been available for 50 years, 7 but challenges persist in achieving safe, high-yield production completely free of helper virus that is not immunogenic. 8 , 9 , 10 HSV delivery can involve low particle numbers, and the vector can transduce most cell types and lineages. The host range of these vectors can also be modified by effective HSV vector retargeting avoiding the use of the viral cognate receptors. 11 , 12 , 13 Here, we describe the development of rdHSV vectors and their current applications, highlighting recent advancements in transgene cassette design. Specifically, we focus on the use of viral and cellular insulators to maintain transgene expression, even in the absence of any expressed viral genes, including infected cell polypeptide 0 (ICP0). The new vector designs have opened the door for broad gene therapy applications involving, for example, durable transgene complexing. Significant strides also have been made in the development of cell lines that complement these highly defective viruses for their production. 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 Thus, gene delivery vectors that can accommodate large and complex payloads are now available. HSV-1 life cycle, virus structure, and replication The biology of HSV-1 pathogenesis, latency, and gene functions has been studied for almost 60 years. 18 HSV-1 is a common human pathogen that establishes lifelong latency in the peripheral nervous system (PNS), most commonly the trigeminal ganglia (TG). HSV-1 can cause blindness by reactivation from the TG and subsequent infection of the corneal epithelium. More severe cases involving the brain and reactivation of wild-type (WT) virus can occur in normal and immunocompromised individuals. 19 , 20 Approximately 60% of adults in the United States have virus-neutralizing antibodies, suggesting prior virus exposure, with a smaller proportion of those infected experiencing recurrent infections. 21 Following viral replication in mucosal or epithelial cells, the virus infects sensory ganglia by entering sensory neurons, where it is transported retrogradely to the nerve cell body through a process involving the cellular molecular motor dynein ( Figure 1 A). In neurons, the latent viral genome is maintained as a circular episome, and a single nucleus can harbor a large number of genomes. 22 The mechanisms underlying the establishment of latency are still incompletely understood; however, it is clear that the virus genome is essentially silent in sensory neurons, except for the expression of the latency-associated transcript (LAT). 23 The LAT gene appears to play an important role in establishing and maintaining latency, and its regulation is controlled by epigenetic means involving two viral insulator boundary elements, CTRL1 and CTRL2, which flank the LAT gene, the latency-associated promoter 1 (LAP1), and the long-term expression element (LTE). 24 , 25 , 26 The primary LAT transcript is 8.3 kb in length and is spliced into a noncoding, highly stable 2-kb lariat RNA expressed in the latently infected neurons. 27 A common cause of reactivation is exposure to intense sunlight, presumably invoking neuronal cell DNA damage, repair, and inflammation. During virus reactivation, the viral immediate-early (IE) regulatory genes are expressed to launch virus replication, leading to the production of newly generated WT virus particles capable of anterograde transport to the site of HSV-1 primary infection. As only a small number of latently infected neurons reactivate the virus, even in patients with recurrent infections, there is typically minimal loss of sensory neurons. The natural life cycle of HSV-1 in sensory neurons, with long-term persistence of the HSV-1 genome in a quiescent, non-toxic state, portends the utility of rdHSV vectors for gene therapy applications to the nervous system. Figure 1 HSV-1 life cycle, virus structure, and replication (A) Diagrammatic representation of HSV infection in the PNS shows viral particles binding to axonal processes, followed by fusion of the viral envelope with the neuronal membrane. Viral capsid proteins then engage molecular motors for retrograde axonal transport to the neuronal cell body, where the viral genome is injected into the nucleus through nuclear pores. There, the virus either enters latency or undergoes lytic infection, producing new viral particles that travel back down the axon via anterograde transport and are eventually released from the neuronal termini. (B) Diagram and electron micrograph of an HSV particle showing the 152-kbp dsDNA genome enclosed within the icosahedral-shaped nucleocapsid, surrounded by the tegument region and an envelope that contains the viral glycoproteins, including those involved in virus attachment and entry (gB, gC, gD, and gH/gL). (C) Wild-type (WT) HSV infection proceeds through a complicated cascade of gene expression, where the tegument protein VP16 that migrates with the particle activates expression of the viral immediate-early (IE) genes, including the ICP4 and ICP27 essential genes and the non-essential genes ICP0 and ICP22 . These genes activate the expression of the early (E) genes involved in viral DNA synthesis, which along with the IE genes, drive the expression of the late (L) structural genes, leading to new viral particle production. Replication-defective HSV vectors (rdHSV) lack at least one essential IE gene ( ICP4 and/or ICP27 ), thereby preventing the expression of the E and L viral genes, rendering them replication defective. Additionally, the non-essential genes ICP0 and ICP22 can be deleted. The virus particle ( Figure 1 B) is composed of an icosahedral-shaped nucleocapsid surrounded by the tegument layer composed of a group of proteins that perform critical functions in the HSV-1 life cycle. For example, virion protein 16 (VP16), is a tegument protein that acts as a transcriptional activator to launch expression of the viral IE genes ( Figure 1 C) upon entry into the cell nucleus. 28 , 29 , 30 The bilayer viral envelope surrounds the tegument layer of the particle and is studded with at least 10 glycoproteins that are involved to varying degrees in virus attachment/entry and spread. 31 , 32 , 33 Some of these viral surface proteins such as glycoproteins E and I (gE and gI) bind the Fc region of immunoglobulin G (IgG) molecules and play a crucial role in reducing the virus’ vulnerability to neutralizing antibodies. 34 , 35 gC binds the complement component C3b and inhibits the interaction of C5 and properdin (P) with C3b, blocking complement activation. 36 , 37 The viral entry process is complex, involving initial particle attachment to cell surface heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycans (HSPGs) mediated primarily by gB and gC. 38 , 39 , 40 Subsequently, the viral gD attaches to one of its principal cognate receptors, HVEM, 41 3- O -sulfated HS, 42 , 43 or nectin-1α. 44 Virus attachment triggers a conformational change in gD 45 , 46 that in turn signals gH and gL 47 , 48 to activate a conformational change in gB, the virus entry fusion molecule. Activated gB fuses the virus envelope 49 , 50 with the cell surface or endosomal membrane to release the particle into the cytoplasm. Microtubular transport of the particle to the nuclear membrane and binding at the nuclear pore complex 51 allows release of the viral genome through the nuclear pore 51 , 52 , 53 into the nucleus, where the replication cycle occurs. The HSV genome is a linear, double-stranded DNA molecule consisting of two unique segments, unique long (U L ) and unique short (U S ), that are each flanked by distinct inverted repeat sequences, with the junction of the two internal repeat segments commonly referred to as the “JOINT” ( Figure 2 A). The JOINT sequence is approximately 15 kbp in length and is highly GC rich, as are the two terminal repeats. The internal inverted repeat sequences also contain duplicate copies of the LAT locus, the essential IE gene encoding ICP4 , and the non-essential IE gene encoding ICP0 . The entire linear double-stranded genome is 152 kbp in length and encodes ∼84 genes. 18 The virus replication program begins with expression of the IE regulatory genes ( ICP4 , ICP27 , ICP22 , ICP47 and ICP0 ) that push the replication program to express the early (E) genes prior to viral genome replication ( Figure 1 C). Among the E gene products are DNA binding proteins and the DNA synthesis machinery that replicates the viral DNA by a rolling circle mechanism. Following viral DNA synthesis, the late (L) genes encoding the virion structural proteins are expressed. Nascent virus capsids incorporate the viral genomes via recognition and cleavage at DNA packaging signals. 54 The viral genome-containing particles leave the nucleus through a complicated process involving budding through the inner nuclear membrane, de-envelopment into the cytoplasm, and secondary envelopment in Golgi-derived vesicles from which the particles can be secreted. Some of the tegument proteins are acquired during primary envelopment and some during the secondary envelopment. The virus is also capable of direct cell-to-cell spread in most cell types through cellular adherence junctions that can allow the virus to escape neutralization by anti-HSV antibodies. 55 , 56 This method of virus spread is employed during the infection of PNS neurons from epithelial cells. Figure 2 Structure of HSV WT genome and replication-defective HSV-derived vectors (A) The HSV genome consists of two segments, unique long (U L ) and unique short (U S ), separated by the reiterated JOINT region. IE genes ( ICP0 , ICP4 , ICP22 , ICP47 , and ICP27 ) are shown in white boxes. HSV endogenous insulator sequences are marked by colored asterisks, indicating their positions. (B) NP2 is an rdHSV vector with deletions of ICP27 and ICP4 (Δ, black boxes). The promoter element for ICP22 and ICP47 has been deleted (ΔpICP22, ΔpICP47). Two copies of the human preproenkephalin gene are inserted in the deleted ICP4 loci, under a CMV promoter. The transgene located in the JOINT is flanked by the ICP4 insulator CTRS3 (red square) upstream, while the downstream insulator CTRS1/2 is deleted. The second transgene copy in the terminal repeat is flanked by the ICP4 insulator elements CTRS3 upstream (red square) and CTRS1/2 downstream (pink square). (C) B-VEC is an rdHSV vector deleted for ICP4 and ICP22 (Δ, black boxes). Two full-length copies of the human collagen type VII alpha 1 chain (COL7A1) gene, each with independent expression controls, are inserted into each ICP4 locus. The specific insertion site is undisclosed, therefore details on insulator flanking are not available. (D) EG110A is an rdHSV vector with deletions of ICP27 , ICP4 , UL55 , UL56 , and JOINT (Δ, black boxes). ICP22 and ICP47 are converted to early expression kinetics by deletion of TAATGARAT promoter-regulatory sequences ( β , gray boxes). EG110A expresses the light chain of the botulinum neurotoxin F (BoNT/F-LC) driven by the human calcitonin gene-related protein (hCGRP) promoter, located in the LAT locus. The transgene cassette is flanked by the LAT insulator element CTRL1 (brown square) upstream, the latency-associated promoter 1 (pLAP1), and the long-term expression element (LTE, purple box). Downstream, the polyA signal is flanked by the LAT insulator element CTRL2 (blue square). (E) JΔNI vectors are rdHSV vectors deleted for the JOINT, ICP4 , ICP27 , and ICP0 (Δ, black boxes). The promoter region of ICP47 is deleted (ΔpICP47), and the ICP22 is converted to early expression kinetics ( β , gray boxes). Potential transgene insertion sites are at the LAT and ICP4 loci. At the LAT locus, the ZsG/fLuc transgene is controlled by the CAG promoter and flanked by the LAT insulator element CTRL1 (brown square) upstream, with pLAP1 and LTE (purple box). Downstream, it is flanked by CTRL2 (blue square). At the ICP4 locus, the transgene is flanked upstream by CTRS3 (red square). (F) vHCA8 is a rdHSV vector belonging to the JΔNI vectors family. It is deleted for the JOINT, ICP4 , ICP27 , and ICP0 (Δ, black boxes). The promoter region of ICP47 is deleted (ΔpICP47), and the ICP22 is converted to early expression kinetics ( β , gray boxes). The human carbonic anhydrase 8 (CA8) gene is inserted into the ICP4 locus, controlled by a CAG promoter. The transgene cassette is flanked upstream by CTRS3 (red triangle). rdHSV vector designs and applications Initial work to engineer HSV vectors provided opportunities to treat problems related to sensory neurons. These vectors were first deleted for ICP4 , or ICP4 and ICP27 together, as these genes encode key regulatory products required for viral gene expression throughout the replication cycle. 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 Vectors deleted for these IE genes are unable to launch expression of the E and L genes ( Figure 1 C). These early rdHSV vectors were cytotoxic for cells in culture and following brain neuron infections in vivo . 17 , 60 However, latently infected sensory neurons in vivo are resistant to virus toxicity due to the rapid shutdown of the virus replication cycle, in part due to the reduced half-life of ICP0 in neurons. 62 , 63 Additionally, ICP0 translation in sensory neurons is restricted by the neuron-specific miRNA, miR-138, which represses its expression. 64 Vectors expressing therapeutic transgenes have been applied safely to treat sensory neuron disorders such as chronic pain 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 and neurogenic bladder 65 , 69 , 70 in mice and rats. This work culminated in a phase 1 dose-escalation clinical trial (this study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT0084076 ) by Diamyd/PeriphaGen (Pittsburgh, PA) for the treatment of chronic focal cancer-induced pain using an ICP4 / ICP27- deleted rdHSV vector, NP2, expressing the pre-proenkephalin gene introduced into the two ICP4- deleted loci ( Figure 2 B). Promising results in patients receiving the high dose of 10 9 plaque-forming units (PFU) displayed dramatically reduced pain rating scores out to 28 days post-NP2 injection into the dermatomes, where the regional pain was located. 71 No vector-related serious adverse events (SAEs) were observed, and there were no differences in the abrogation of pain observed in patients who were reported to be HSV-seropositive prior to administration of the NP2 vector. Based on these results, a phase 2 trial (this study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT101291901 ) was initiated but not completed. Another application of rdHSV vectors has involved the treatment of dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB) using an ICP4 / ICP22 -deleted vector, B-VEC ( Figure 2 C), which expresses the human collagen type VII alpha 1 chain (COL7A1) gene. This gene encodes type VII collagen, a key component of anchoring fibrils that connect the epidermis to the dermis and is deficient in DEB patients. B-VEC treatment showed remarkable success in a phase 1/2 study, 72 with measurable COL7A1 expression from the vector in the absence of SAEs. The treatment resulted in ∼80%–95% complete wound closure at 8–12 weeks compared to 0%–35% with the placebo control. In a follow-up phase 3 trial involving 31 patients treated weekly with 4 × 10 8 –1.2 × 10 9 PFU of B-VEC in a topical gel, 67%–71% wound healing was observed in vector-treated patients compared to ∼20% with the placebo control. This outcome was observed in 64% of patients who were HSV-seropositive at the beginning of the study. B-VEC (commercial name: Vyjuvek) has now received FDA approval. 73 This work has been carried out by Krystal Biotech (Pittsburgh, PA) and will be described in detail in a separate review. Another rdHSV vector, EG110A ( Figure 2 D), is deleted for the ICP4 , ICP27, UL55 , and UL56 genes, as well as the viral joint sequences (ΔJOINT). Additionally, the ICP22 and ICP47 genes have been modified to support only E gene expression kinetics by deleting the TAATGARAT promoter-regulatory sequences unique to IE genes. The EG110A vector will be used in a phase 1 clinical trial (this study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT0659629 ) in patients with neurogenic bladder disease due to spinal cord injury. 74 Developed by the company EG 427 (Paris, France), the EG110A vector carries a botulinum neurotoxin F light-chain (BoT/F-LC) gene construct under the control of the human calcitonin gene-related protein (hCGRP) promoter, integrated as a single copy in the LAT locus ( Figure 2 D). Using our ICP4 / ICP27 /joint-deleted vector backbone, we have shown that the hCGRP promoter was active in PNS bladder C-fiber afferent dorsal root ganglion neurons, whereas the NF200 promoter was active in large-fiber afferent neurons when vectors were injected into the bladder wall in rats. 75 Expression of BoT/F-LC from EG110A was observed out to 24 weeks post-injection of bladder detrusor muscle, which reduced detrusor contractions and voiding in a capsaicin-treated model of bladder hypersensitivity. Development of rdHSV vectors with improved safety profile A major drawback to using rdHSV vectors for gene therapy has been vector-related toxicity and induction of inflammation. To address this, the development of safer rdHSV vectors requires the elimination of all viral gene expression. As described above, four of the five IE genes have been deleted in a single vector in various combinations. Notably, vectors carrying mutations in two IE genes exhibit lower cytotoxicity compared to their single-gene mutant counterparts. Despite these modifications, rdHSV vectors lacking only functional ICP4 and ICP27 or ICP4 and ICP22 still exhibit partial toxicity, primarily due to the expression of ICP0 . 14 , 17 , 59 , 60 Studies using a series of viruses individually deleted for ICP27 , ICP4 , and ICP22 revealed that these genes are not required for apoptosis induction; rather, their gene products prevent apoptosis through regulatory effects. In contrast, ICP0 acts as an “apoptoxin” both necessary and sufficient to trigger the cell death cascade. 76 Further investigations comparing ICP4/ICP27 with ICP4/ICP27/ICP0 mutants demonstrated that deletion of ICP0 , in addition to ICP4 and ICP27 , reduces cytotoxicity and lowers the expression levels of viral genes. 58 Moreover, ICP0 expression has been shown to increase the susceptibility of HSV-infected cells to natural killer cell-mediated lysis by activating natural cytotoxicity receptors, which are crucial components of the antiviral immune response. 77 To evaluate the impact of ICP0 deletion on vector safety in vivo , we compared a rescued ICP0 -expressing rdHSV vector with a rdHSV vector lacking ICP0 in the absence of all the other IE gene products. Our analysis assessed lymphocyte infiltration, oxidative stress, apoptosis, neuroinflammation (including microglial activation), and neurodegeneration. Notably, these adverse effects were observed with the ICP0 -expressing vector but not with the ICP0 − vector. 78 These findings indicate that removing ICP0 significantly improves the safety profile of rdHSV vectors. However, the necessity of ICP0 deletion depends on the target tissue. In some contexts, ICP0 removal is not required to achieve a safe and effective gene therapy approach. For instance, sensory neurons express neuron-specific microRNAs (miRNAs) that repress ICP0 expression, mitigating its cytotoxic effects. 64 Additionally, in tissues with actively dividing cells, or when the therapeutic gene product has a long half-life, ICP0 -associated cytotoxicity poses a lesser challenge. In contrast, applications involving non-dividing cells, such as neurons in the central nervous system (CNS), will require the deletion of ICP0 to prevent cytotoxicity. Beyond ICP0 well-characterized cytotoxic effects, recent research has linked other HSV IE proteins to CNS abnormalities. Specifically, the expression of ICP27 during HSV-1 infection has been shown to increase tau phosphorylation through the cGAS-STING-TBK1 pathway, suggesting that phosphorylated tau may play a protective role in neuronal survival. 79 ICP0 is a special multifunctional protein that prevents epigenetic downregulation of all viral gene expression, and although it is not essential to virus replication in culture, 80 , 81 , 82 it strongly supports virus growth, especially at a low multiplicity of infection (MOI). As an E3 ubiquitin ligase, ICP0 utilizes its ring finger domain to target cellular nuclear restriction factors, such as PML and IFI16, for ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. 83 , 84 , 85 ICP0 also degrades cellular products involved in the innate immune response, such as interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) 3 and 7. 86 , 87 , 88 ICP0 induces cell-cycle arrest 89 , 90 , 91 and initially delays, then induces, apoptosis with strong caspase-3 activation. 76 , 92 It is a key regulator of virus growth, reactivation from latency, and viral pathogenesis. 93 , 94 , 95 ICP0 is also highly immunogenic, inducing both antibody responses and cytotoxic CD8 T cell activation/recruitment. 96 , 97 While ICP0 plays a crucial role in maintaining viral gene expression, its expression can lead to adverse cellular effects. Conversely, its removal, while reducing toxicity, leads to epigenetic silencing of payload gene expression, highlighting a key challenge in vector designs. Overcoming transgene silencing in ICP0 gene deleted rdHSV vectors The latest generation of rdHSV-1 vectors, exemplified by the group of vectors called joint deleted no IE genes (JΔNI), have been engineered to minimize viral gene expression and associated toxicity. The JΔNI5-8 vectors lack expression of all of the IE genes ( Figure 2 E). 14 , 98 Beyond eliminating ICP4 and ICP27 , these vectors also lack the ICP0 gene. Additionally, the ICP22 gene was modified to support only E gene expression kinetics by deleting the TAATGARAT promoter-regulatory sequences unique to IE genes. Meanwhile, the ICP47 promoter region is deleted. These rdHSV vectors were also engineered to eliminate the viral joint sequences (ΔJOINT). In the absence of ICP0 expression, the viral genome in transduced cells, including transgene cassettes, undergoes rapid silencing. To maintain transgene expression, the cassettes were strategically flanked by natural viral insulators, such as those near the IE and LAT loci. 14 , 24 , 99 These modifications rendered the vectors void of viral gene expression while leveraging the insulator sequences to enable robust transgene expression in neuronal and non-neuronal cells in vitro . 14 Moreover, the transgene expression profiles were shown to differ across various cell types when the cassettes are located at the LAT and ICP4 loci. To determine whether the observed differences between the two loci were due to the distinct promoters used in these original studies or the genomic placement of the transgene cassette and flanking viral insulators, we have recently compared transgene expression following placement of an identical cassette in the two locations. We have recently found that the ICP4 locus expresses a higher level of transgene product than the LAT locus in neurons only at the earliest time point post-vector delivery, both in vitro and in vivo. 100 Additionally, a transgene cassette inserted in an intergenic region without insulators failed to express the transgene. 14 These findings underscore the critical role of insertion site and promoter environment in achieving prolonged and cell-type-specific transgene expression. We recently employed our ICP4- , ICP27- , and ICP0 -deficient rdHSV vectors to express the carbonic anhydrase 8 (CA8) gene from the CAG promoter introduced within the ICP4 locus (vHCA8; Figure 2 F). 101 The CA8 gene product has been shown to induce analgesia through its action on inositol trisphosphate receptor-1, leading to decreased endoplasmic reticulum calcium release, which in turn alters the regulation of neuronal excitability. 102 , 103 Injection of the vHCA8 vector into the knee joints of mice with mono-iodoacetate (MIA)-induced knee joint arthritis demonstrated that vector-mediated CA8 expression ameliorated MIA-induced chronic pain out to over 8 weeks post-delivery. 104 This work has been carried out with Adolore BioTherapeutics (Miami, FL) and will be described in detail in a separate review of HSV vector-mediated gene therapy for the treatment of chronic pain. The JΔNI vectors combine reduced neuronal toxicity and long-term transgene expression, making them essential for therapeutic applications targeting the CNS. In vivo studies demonstrated robust neuron-specific transgene expression from the ICP4 locus for up to 6 months when delivered to various brain regions. 78 , 98 Toxicity assessments, including markers of neuronal damage, apoptosis, oxidative stress, lymphocyte infiltration, and microglia activation, revealed no significant adverse effects. In contrast, a similar vector expressing ICP0 exhibited all these markers of toxicity. 78 Although transgene expression persisted under protection of the viral insulators, the level of expression tended to decline over time in neurons. The importance of the viral insulators prompted evaluation of additional anti-silencing elements to sustain high-level transgene expression. A novel insulator design, incorporating scaffold matrix attachment region (SMAR) and tRNA sequences in the ICP4 locus, enhanced transgene expression compared to a viral insulator alone. Transgene expression under the viral insulator alone declined to background levels by 6 months post-vector delivery. While we observed a decline in transgene expression with the combined viral and cellular insulators design, sustained transgene expression was observed for up to 18 months in the mouse brain, maintaining expression levels 1 log above the background signal ( Figure 3 A). This represents an improvement upon previous insulator designs, with neurons remaining the principal cell type expressing the transgene ( Figure 3 B). 100 Figure 3 Impact of cellular insulators in the ICP4 locus on in vivo transgene expression (A) Luciferase activity (fLuc) expressed as bioluminescence signals (p/s) upon JΔNI vector delivery to mouse hippocampus. Black circle, background bioluminescence from animals’ fur; light gray circle, fLuc activity from vector with expression cassette within the ICP4 locus (viral insulator; n = 3) out to 6 months post-vector delivery; orange circle, fLuc activity from 2tR-SMAR-supplemented expression cassette within the ICP4 locus (viral/cellular insulators; n = 3) out to 18 months. Data are means ± SEMs per group. (B) Representative coronal section of the mouse hippocampus injected with 2tR-SMAR-supplemented expression cassette within the ICP4 (viral/cellular insulators) at 6 (top) and 18 (bottom) months post-vector injection (mpi). ZsGreen + (ZsG + ) cells in green, NeuroTrace (NT) staining of neuronal body in red, and ZsG and NT merged image. Horizontal bar, 250 μm. When located in an intergenic region, the new insulator design provided robust expression of a flanking transgene in vitro . 100 These results suggest that multiple transgenes within a single vector could be independently regulated using different promoter-insulator combinations. The deletion of the JOINT region has provided extra payload capacity compared to other rdHSV vectors. We have taken advantage of this high payload capacity to incorporate a 16.5-kb full-length murine dystrophin cDNA into a vector and show expression in differentiated muscle progenitor cells derived from dystrophin-deficient mdx mice. 14 Recently, studies involving restoration of the JOINT region with a ICP0/ICP4 -disabled copy in a rdHSV vector, KTT3, resulted in enhanced virus replication during production and improved transgene expression during transduction (T. Tran, N.A. DeLuca, J.C.G., and D.M.K., unpublished data). Ongoing studies aim to compare the performance of JΔNI vectors with KT33 in vivo . The tradeoff in preserving the JOINT region relates to the reduction in payload capacity. However, for many applications, enhanced vector production efficiency may be required. Production of highly defective ICP0 -deleted rdHSV vectors Development of methods to produce and purify rdHSV vectors for clinical trials is an important component of the process of taking any gene therapy product to the clinic, and it is one that is frequently overlooked by groups aiming to test their products in human clinical trials. We initially developed methodologies to produce high-titer rdHSV vector preparations in African green monkey kidney (Vero) cell lines engineered in our lab to provide in trans the HSV essential ICP4 and ICP27 gene products, 60 , 105 similar to a line developed by others for their rdHSV viruses. 106 To complement rdHSV vectors lacking the most cytotoxic HSV IE genes ( ICP4 , ICP27 , and ICP0 ), a Vero-based cell line was developed expressing all three IE genes. 17 We, in addition, engineered an osteosarcoma (U2OS) cell line to express ICP4 and ICP27 , 14 leveraging the ability of U2OS cells to enhance the replication of ICP0 -deleted viruses. 107 This growth-promoting property of U2OS cells argues that some function complements the role of ICP0 or that U2OS cells possess defects in restriction factors that compensate for the function of ICP0. 108 , 109 , 110 , 111 To better define the HSV upstream biomanufacturing processes requirements, we first optimized cell culture conditions and infection parameters for producing high-titer rdHSV stocks in the Vero 7b cell line expressing ICP4 and ICP27 . 60 , 105 We found that 80% confluency of Vero 7b cells grown in T-flask flatware 112 , 113 , 114 was ideal for increasing vector yields. Additionally, serum-free media (SFM) buffered between pH 6.8 and 7.5 and an MOI of 0.005 to 0.001 PFU per cell optimized production. Shifting the growth temperature from 37°C to 33°C at 24 h post-infection further enhanced vector yield. The highest yields were observed at 6–8 days post-infection, with virus harvested from both the supernatant and infected cells. Because most virus remained cell associated, we focused on improving cell lysis to release more virus while preventing viral binding through HSV glycoproteins gC and gB to HSPGs 38 , 39 , 40 on uninfected and infected cells and cellular debris. We showed that treatment of vector-infected cell monolayers with 0.45 M NaCl disrupted this interaction, thereby increasing the levels of vector in the virus supernatant. 104 , 115 Alternatively, dextran sulfate can be used to enhance virus release when infection reaches 100% cytopathic effect. 116 , 117 We established downstream HSV purification processes by developing a lab-based protocol for rdHSV purification that originally employed ultracentrifugation using iodixanol or sucrose gradient purification. 118 We determined that repetitive centrifugation steps were detrimental to maintaining virus infectivity due to damage to the virus particle envelope. This led to a modified protocol combining centrifugation with a 0.8-μm filtration step. 115 , 117 Although this protocol was ideal for producing and purifying rdHSV for in vitro cell culture and in vivo animal studies, it could not be transferred successfully to a cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) manufacturing facility for the purification of large quantities of vector produced in cell factories or bioreactors. We developed a series of in-line purification steps combining tangential flow filtration (TFF) with ion-exchange chromatography such as HS affinity or Mustang-Q columns, 116 , 117 following endonuclease digestion to remove host cell DNA and extraneous extracellular viral nucleic acids. The combination of our upstream and downstream production-purification process is detailed in Figure 4 . Similar schemata have been used to produce HSV vector products like Imlygic (Amgen) and Vyjuvek (Krystal Biotech) that represent FDA-approved HSV gene therapy products. Figure 4 Schematic of cGMP production and purification of rdHSV vectors deleted for ICP4 , ICP27 , and ICP0 We previously engineered a U2OS cell line that expresses both HSV IE genes ICP4 and ICP27 in trans since the U2OS line can complement ICP0 mutants. We developed a protocol to propagate these cells in T-flasks and multilayer cell factories to seed small-scale and eventually large-scale bioreactors. We have determined the proper multiplicity of infection (MOI) to provide optimal virus growth and production in serum-free media (VP-SFM). After 1 day at 37°C, we shifted the infected cultures to 33°C. This temperature shift created an optimal environment for virus replication while slowing cell division, which enhanced virus spread. To increase the release of virus from the infected cells and remaining cell debris, we introduced both dextran sulfate and sodium chloride to lyse open remaining virus-infected cells and keep released virus from binding back to heparin sulfate residues on portions of the lysed cells. The released virus in the supernatant was harvested and processed using tangential flow filtration (TFF) to concentrate the virus and adjust the solution for salt-active nuclease (SAN) digestion. Due to the high-salt nature of the viral solution, benzonase cannot be used for extravirion DNA digestion. After nuclease digestion, anion exchange chromatography was performed using either heparin affinity chromatography (HS) or Mustang-Q columns, where the vector binds effectively and can be eluted in high salt. A second TFF step further concentrated the vector and performed buffer exchange into the appropriate formulation for vial filling and storage at −80°C. The vector samples were then tested for titer using a standard plaque assay for vector genome copies by qPCR and for mycoplasma, sterility, and levels of host cell protein and DNA. Conclusions The main application of HSV vectors thus far relates to their lytic activity. Replication-competent oncolytic HSV (oHSV) vectors have been employed in numerous patient trials, mostly for cancer treatment, 119 , 120 , 121 which culminated in the FDA approval of Imlygic (talimogene laherparepvec, Amgen) as the first gene therapy product in the United States used to treat malignant melanoma. Further progress in the development and arming of oHSV vectors continues at a very rapid pace, as have the number of new human clinical trials in the United States and worldwide. Although not as advanced as their replicating counterparts, considerable progress has been made in recent years in the development and clinical use of rdHSV vectors for the treatment of PNS and other disorders. Recent clinical trials by Krystal Biotech 72 , 73 have resulted in FDA approval of B-VEC (Vyjuvek) for treating collagen-deficient DEB disease. This approval builds on earlier rdHSV vector platforms, such as those used by Diamyd in chronic pain trials. 71 However, the application of rdHSV vectors in the CNS remains challenging due to residual cellular responses, which are primarily linked to the presence of the HSV IE regulatory gene ICP0 . While deletion of this non-essential gene reduces these issues, it has negatively impacted long-term therapeutic gene expression from the viral backbone. 17 Recent work by our group 100 , 122 has focused on incorporating cellular insulator elements to maintain open chromatin and enable sustained long-term gene expression from the silent/quiescent viral vector genomes. In addition, the development of manufacturing and standard operating procedures for producing high-titer, purified rdHSV stocks deleted for all IE genes, including ICP0 , has been challenging. This is due to the inability to express ICP0 in trans during vector propagation, as its expression in trans proved toxic. Nevertheless, advancements in vector engineering and long-term therapeutic gene expression methodologies are paving the way for the transition of in vitro ICP0 -deleted rdHSV development into cGMP facilities, human clinical trials, and FDA-approved gene therapy products. We anticipate that this new generation of rdHSV vectors will prove to be powerful gene delivery tools for treating some of our most prevalent and debilitating neurological diseases, such as Parkinson and Alzheimer disease, that are multifaceted and will likely require complex gene therapy strategies. Acknowledgments This research was supported by 10.13039/100000002 NIH grants R43 TR003558 , UG3 NS127316 , R01 CA222804 , and P01 CA163205 (J.C.G.). The graphical abstract was created in BioRender ( https://BioRender.com/g63u778 ). Author contributions Conceptualization, J.C.G., W.F.G., and S.I. Writing – original draft, J.C.G., W.F.G., and S.I. Writing – review &amp; editing, S.I., J.B.C., W.F.G., and D.M.K.; Y.M commented on the manuscript. Funding acquisition, J.C.G. Declaration of interests J.B.C. and J.C.G. are inventors of intellectual property licensed to Replay (San Diego, CA) and Adolore BioTherapeutics (Delray Beach, FL). J.C.G. is a consultant to and co-founder of Replay and Adolore and for EG 427 (Paris, France) and Arcadius Bio (New York, NY). W.F.G. is a consultant to Adolore. D.M.K. was formerly a consultant to and co-founder of Replay. S.I. is a co-founder of Arcadius Bio (New York, NY).