Perivascular spread of CSF-derived α-synuclein oligomers drives region-specific Parkinson’s-like pathology

While the level of α-synuclein oligomers (α-SOs) in the CSF of patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD) is consistently increased, its pathogenic role in PD remains poorly understood. This study focuses on the role of CSF-derived α-SOs in PD pathology. We demonstrated that CSF-derived α-synuclein enters the brain via perivascular spaces, which was more abundant in the olfactory bulb (OB) than in the substantia nigra (SN). We also found that neuroinflammation was more pronounced in the OB than in the SN following α-SOs injection. α-SOs-treated mice exhibited an early and persistent loss of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the OB, along with olfactory deficit. Conversely, DA neuron loss in the SN occurred later and was associated with motor dysfunction. Furthermore, reducing α-SOs dose alleviated OB pathology. These findings suggest that perivascular spread of CSF-derived α-SOs induces region-specific PD-like pathology, indicating that removing CSF-derived α-SOs could slow PD progression.

Introduction Parkinson’s disease (PD) is characterised by motor dysfunction, such as tremor and rigidity, which is preceded by a number of non-motor symptoms including olfactory deficits 1 – 3 . The typical pathological hallmarks of PD include the degeneration of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) and the formation of Lewy bodies (LB) in surviving neurons. The main component of LB is α-synuclein (α-syn), a protein encoded by the SNCA gene. Under pathological conditions, α-syn monomers are able to form soluble oligomers (α-SOs), polymers, preformed fibrils (PFFs), and insoluble fibrils (Fs) 4 . Among these aggregates, α-SOs exhibit the most potent neurotoxicity via multiple mechanisms 5 . The levels of phosphorylated α-syn, α-SOs, and PFFs in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are significantly higher in patients with PD than in healthy individuals, patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD), and patients with progressive supranuclear palsy 3 , 6 – 8 . Additionally, the ratio of α-SOs/total α-syn in the CSF of patients with PD is consistently higher than that of healthy individuals and correlates closely with the degree of PD lesion 6 , 9 . These findings highlight the potential role of CSF-derived α-syn as a promising diagnostic biomarker and treatment target for PD. Current research on CSF-derived α-syn primarily focuses on its role in the auxiliary diagnosis of PD. However, its contribution in PD onset and progression remains poorly understood; moreover, therapeutic strategies targeting CSF-derived α-syn are notably scarce. Studies have shown that a single intracerebroventricular (ICV) injection of α-SOs can induce PD-like lesions. Fortuna et al. 10 reported that α-SO injection caused marked reduction in dopamine levels in the olfactory bulb (OB) of mice, along with acute and persistent olfactory dysfunction (lasting up to 45 days post-injection [dpi]), while motor control and striatal dopamine levels are affected at later time points (45 dpi). Moreover, Martin et al. 11 discovered that 24 h after ICV injection of α-SOs, the mice exhibited pathological changes in hippocampal neurons, along with learning and memory impairments. La Vitola et al. 12 administered a single ICV injection of α-syn monomers, α-SOs, and Fs in mice. At 24 h post-injection (hpi), α-SOs-injected mice showed memory impairment symptoms, whereas no significant changes were observed in the monomer- and Fs-injected mice. These studies indicate that CSF-derived α-SOs are neurotoxic and may contribute to the initiation or progression of PD pathology. However, the mechanisms through which CSF-derived α-syn enters the brain remain poorly understood. A large proportion of CSF in the subarachnoid space reflux into the brain through perivascular spaces (PVSs) and exchanges with the brain’s interstitial fluid (ISF) 13 . This CSF–ISF exchange is mediated by aquaporin-4 (AQP4) channels located on the astrocytic endfeet, referred to as the glymphatic system 14 . The glymphatic system not only eliminates neurotoxic proteins, such as Aβ and tau, but also functions as a vital transport network within the brain 15 – 18 . Under physiological conditions, the glymphatic system facilitates the transport of nutrients and neuroactive substances from CSF into the brain 19 . However, due to its non-selective nature, it also allows toxic solutes, such as Aβ, to enter the brain 20 . Thus, we hypothesised that pathogenic α-syn in CSF may enter the brain via the glymphatic flow and contribute to subsequent neuronal degeneration. In this study, employing three-dimensional fluorescence microscopy and other techniques, we aimed to investigate the mechanism by which CSF-derived α-syn spreads into the brain and determine its role in region-specific PD-like pathology. Results CSF-derived α-syn spreads into the brain via PVSs and most robustly accumulates in the OB We first performed optical tissue clearing followed by light sheet fluorescence microscopy to characterise the spreading pathway of CSF-derived α-syn into the brain. At 45 min following ICV infusion with Hilyte Fluor-488-labelled recombinant human α-syn (HF488-α-syn), mice brain specimens were fixed, optically cleared, and subjected to light-sheet fluorescence microscopy imaging (experimental procedures are shown in Fig. 1A ). The 3D visualisations of the spatial distribution of HF488-α-syn across the whole brain were obtained (Supplementary Video 1 ). Four coronal sections (200 μm) extracted from the 3D dataset sequentially illustrated the distribution of HF488-α-syn from anterior to posterior brain regions (Fig. 1B ). We observed that the dispersion of CSF-derived α-syn considerably differed among cerebral regions. Fluorescent α-syn predominantly accumulated in the OB, cerebellum (CB), and ventricles (Fig. 1B ). In contrast, only weak and diffuse autofluorescence was observed throughout the brain sections of negative control (NC) mice that did not receive HF488–α-syn injection (Supplementary Fig. 2A ). Furthermore, microplate assay was used to quantitatively detect the content of HF488-α-syn in defined brain regions 45 min post-infusion. We observed that the uptake of HF488-α-syn was highest in the OB and CB, followed by the striatum (STR) and ventral cortex (VC), whereas it was lowest in the SN (Fig. 1G ). In addition, fluorescence quantification of HF488-α-syn on vibratome sections revealed distinct spatial variations within the OB. The HF488-α-syn signal was strongest in the medial olfactory bulb (OB(m)), followed by the lateral olfactory bulb (OB(l)) and inner olfactory bulb (OB(i)) (Fig. 1D ), whereas brain sections from NC mice exhibited only weak autofluorescence (Supplementary Fig. 2C ). This observation indicated the influx of CSF-derived α-syn varied not only among different brain regions but also within a single brain region. Fig. 1 Tissue-clearing imaging reveals that CSF α-synuclein spreads into the brain via PVSs in a region-dependent manner. A Schematic illustration of ICV injection and tissue-clearing imaging workflow. Lateral view 3D reconstruction of HF488-α-syn across the whole mouse brain (right, dashed lines indicate the planes of four coronal sections shown in ( B ). B Representative images of reconstructed coronal slices showing HF488-α-syn distribution at four different positions: +4.2, −1.58, −2.92, −6.84 mm from the bregma. C 3D reconstruction image showing HF488-α-syn distribution across the whole mouse brain (left, dorsal view) and OB (medial, front view). Influx of HF488-α-syn along PVSs (white arrows) and cellular uptake (yellow arrows) in the OB are shown in detail (right). D Representative images of coronal OB sections showing the distribution of HF488-α-syn (green) within 3 ROIs (sketched by white dashed lines) at two different positions: bregma +4.28 mm (up), bregma −1.58 mm (down). Quantitative analysis of HF488-α-syn fluorescence intensity within the three regions of OB at 45 min post-ICV injection. Brains were harvested and sliced into 100-μm coronal sections using a vibratome. E Representative images of reconstructed sagittal section (lateral, 0.96 mm) showing cellular uptake of HF488-α-syn (yellow arrows) around the OA. F Representative images of a longitudinal section (left) and cross-section (right) of blood vessels demonstrating α-syn (green) surrounding the outside of blood vessels (lectin-labelled, red). G Quantification of HF488-α-syn concentrations across seven brain regions at 45 min post-ICV injection. * P &lt; 0.05, *** P &lt; 0.001 vs SN, n = 5 ( G ). * P &lt; 0.05, *** P &lt; 0.001 vs OB(m); ### P &lt; 0.001 vs OB(l), n = 5 ( D ). P -values were calculated using one-way ANOVA ( D and G ). CSF cerebrospinal fluid, PVSs perivascular spaces, ICV intracerebroventricular, α-syn α-synuclein, 3D three-dimensional, OB olfactory bulb, OA olfactory area, ROI region of interest. Since the spread of CSF-derived α-syn into the brain is most abundant in the OB, we determined the OB to be the primary ROI. The 3D visualisations demonstrated that the dispersion of HF488-α-syn along PVSs distinctly delineated the vascular architecture within the OB (Fig. 1C , white arrows). Representative images of the coronal and sagittal brain sections revealed a strong HF488-α-syn signal surrounding the dense network of blood vessels within the OB. As the blood vessels penetrated deeper into the brain tissue, the signal of HF488-α-syn gradually diminished (Fig. 1C, E ). Moreover, immunofluorescence analysis confirmed that α-syn (green) was located surrounding blood vessels (lectin-labelled, red) instead of entering the vessel lumen (Fig. 1F ). Notably, numerous cells containing HF488-α-syn were observed within the OB (Fig. 1C, E , yellow arrows). Next, we administered cisterna magna (CM) injection and performed fluorescence micro-optical sectioning tomography (fMOST) to confirm CSF-derived α-syn influx. At 30 min post-infusion, mice brains were fixed, processed, and imaged using fMOST. High-resolution 3D reconstructed images of whole mouse brains were acquired (experimental procedures are shown in Fig. 2A ). The 3D visualisations of the spatial distribution of HF488-α-syn across the whole brain are presented in Supplementary Video 2 . Representative images of coronal sections exhibited strong signals of HF488-α-syn in the OB, CB, and ventral brain regions, consistent with the findings observed following ICV injection (Fig. 2D–G ). However, the signal intensity of HF488-α-syn in the ventricles was substantially lower after CM injection than after ICV injection (Figs. 1B and 2E ). Microplate assay further confirmed a high uptake of HF488-α-syn in the OB, followed by the SN and STR (Fig. 2B ), aligning with the findings obtained following ICV injection. Fig. 2 fMOST reveals that CSF-derived α-syn spreads into the brain via PVSs in a region-dependent manner. A Schematic illustration of CM injection and fMOST workflow. B Quantification of HF488-α-syn concentrations in seven brain regions at 30 min post-CM injection. C 3D-reconstructed fMOST image showing the distribution of α-syn in deep brain regions (lateral view). Representative images of reconstructed coronal slices showing HF488-α-syn distribution at four different positions: D +4.28, E −1.58, F −2.92, G −6.36 mm from the bregma and cellular uptake (yellow arrows) of α-syn in the OB ( D ), VC ( E ), SN ( F, Ⅰ ), and HIP ( F, Ⅱ ). Representative images for IBA1 + ( H ), Neun + ( I ) and GFAP + ( J ) immunostaining (red) and co-localisation with HF488-α-syn (green). * P &lt; 0.05, *** P &lt; 0.001 vs SN, n = 5. P -values were calculated using one-way ANOVA. fMOST fluorescence micro-optical sectioning tomography, PVSs perivascular spaces, CM cisterna magna, α-syn α-synuclein, 3D three-dimensional, OB olfactory bulb, VC ventral cortex, SN substantia nigra, HIP hippocampus. Additionally, fMOST revealed HF488-α-syn accumulation along elongated penetrating vessels at the brain base (Fig. 2C ). These vascular networks originated from the Circle of Willis, comprising branches of the anterior cerebral artery (ACA), middle cerebral artery (MCA), and posterior cerebral artery (PCA). The OA (branch of ACA) extended anteriorly from the brain base to the OB. Some branches of the PCA penetrated posteriorly to innervate the SN. The azygos branch of the ACA, as another principal ACA branch, gave rise to multiple small arteries. Additionally, the STR was innervated by the branches of the MCA (Fig. 2C ). The PVSs along these penetrating arteries are speculated to be the main routes for the transport of CSF-derived α-syn into the brain. Furthermore, we observed a large number of cells containing HF488-α-syn in the OB, VC, SN, and hippocampus (Fig. 2D–F ). In contrast, brain sections from NC mice exhibited low, diffuse background fluorescence without discernible cellular structures (Supplementary Fig 2B ). Within the OB, these cells were mainly localised to the glomerular layer (Fig. 2D ). Immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated that these cells were microglia (IBA1 + ) (Fig. 2H ) and neurons (Neun + ) (Fig. 2I ) but not astrocytes (GFAP + ) (Fig. 2J ). ICV injection of α-SOs induces greater neuroinflammation and DA neuron loss in the OB than in the SN We next investigated neuroinflammation induced by α-SOs administration. The mice received unilateral ICV injection of α-SOs (3 μg, α-SOs group) or PBS (control; CON group). At 6 hpi, mice brain specimens were extracted, fixed, sectioned, and processed for immunostaining (experimental flowchart is shown in Supplementary Fig. 1 ). Representative images of coronal sections demonstrated changes in microglia (IBA1 + , green) and astrocytes (GFAP + , purple) in the OB and SN of the CON and α-SOs groups (Fig. 3A–D ). α-SOs-treated mice revealed a markedly elevated IBA1⁺ signal intensity in the OB and SN compared to CON mice. Notably, the OB exhibited a more pronounced increase in IBA1⁺ signal compared to the SN (Fig. 3E, H ). Furthermore, α-SOs injection significantly increased GFAP⁺ immunoreactivity in the OB, whereas no significant change was observed in the SN (Fig. 3F, I ). Given that glial cells activation modulates neuroinflammatory responses, we next examined the transcriptional level of proinflammatory cytokines in the OB and SN 6 hpi. Quantitative analysis revealed significantly elevated mRNA levels of tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interleukin-1β (IL-1β) in the OB of α-SOs-treated mice relative to CON mice (Fig. 3G ). While a significant increase was observed only in IL-1β mRNA, no such changes were observed in TNF-α and IL-6 mRNAs in the SN of α-SOs-treated mice relative to CON mice (Fig. 3J ). These findings indicated that CSF-derived α-SOs could activate glial cells and elevate the transcription of proinflammatory cytokines in the OB and SN. Moreover, the OB exhibited greater neuroinflammatory reactivity compared to the SN. Fig. 3 ICV injection of α-SOs induces glial cells activation and proinflammatory cytokine production. A , B IBA1 + immunostaining (green) displays microglial changes in the OB and SN of CON and α-SOs-treated mice at 6 hpi. C , D GFAP + immunostaining (purple) displays astrocytic changes in the OB and SN of CON and α-SOs-treated mice at 6 hpi. E , F Quantification of IBA1 + and GFAP + fluorescence intensity in the OB. G Quantitative PCR analysis of TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β transcriptional levels in the OB. H , I Quantification of IBA1 + and GFAP + fluorescence intensity in the SN. J Quantitative PCR analysis of TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β transcriptional levels in the SN. * P &lt; 0.05, ** P &lt; 0.01 vs CON, n = 4–5. P -values indicate significant differences calculated using the unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test. ICV intracerebroventricular, α-SOs α-synuclein oligomers, CON control, OB olfactory bulb, SN substantia nigra, hpi hours post-injection, PCR polymerase chain reaction, TNF-α tumour necrosis factor- α, IL-6 interleukin-6, IL-1β interleukin1β. Further, we performed tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunostaining on the brain sections to assess the neurotoxic effects of CSF-derived α-SOs on DA neurons. Representative images of sagittal sections demonstrated a considerably attenuated TH⁺ immunofluorescence in the OB of α-SOs-treated mice compared to CON mice at 4 dpi (Fig. 4A ). Representative images and quantitative analysis of coronal sections revealed that the OB(m) exhibited significant TH⁺ neuron loss at early time points (4 dpi), with progressive degeneration persisting through 56 dpi. In contrast, the OB(l) maintained stable TH⁺ neurons populations (Fig. 4B–G ). This regional difference was possibly caused by the differential CSF α-SOs penetration pattern, with greater α-SOs uptake in the OB(m) compared to the OB(l) (Fig. 1D ). Moreover, western blot analysis revealed no significant reduction in TH protein at 4 dpi, though a decreasing trend was observed (Fig. 4H ). The significant reduction in TH expression emerged at 28 dpi and persisted until 56 dpi (Fig. 4H ). Fig. 4 ICV injection of α-SOs causes acute and persistent DA neurons loss in the OB. A Representative images of sagittal brain sections showing TH + immunostaining in the brain of CON and α-SOs-treated mice at 4 dpi (dashed lines indicate the planes of coronal sections in B – D ). B – D Representative images of coronal sections showing TH + immunostaining in the OB(m) (Ⅰ, Ⅲ) and OB(l) (Ⅱ, Ⅳ) of CON and α-SOs-treated mice at 4 ( B ), 28 ( C ), and 56 dpi ( D ). Quantification of TH⁺ cells in the OB(m) and OB(l) at 4 ( E ), 28 ( F ), and 56 dpi ( G ). H Western blot analysis of TH protein levels in the OB at 4, 28, and 56 dpi, including representative blots and quantification. * P &lt; 0.05, ** P &lt; 0.01 vs CON, n = 4–6. P -values indicate significant differences calculated using the unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test. ICV intracerebroventricular, α-SOs α-synuclein oligomers, DA dopaminergic, TH tyrosine hydroxylase, CON control, OB olfactory bulb, dpi days post-injection. Next, we examined changes in DA neurons in the SN at the same time points. Representative images of sagittal sections revealed a relatively diminished TH⁺ immunofluorescence in the SN and OB of α-SOs-treated mice compared to CON mice at 56 dpi (Fig. 5A ). Representative images and quantitative analysis of coronal sections demonstrated a stable TH⁺ neuron population in the SN during early phases (4 and 28 dpi; Fig. 5B, C, E, F ), followed by substantial TH⁺ neuron loss at 56 dpi (Fig. 5D, G ). Consistently, western blot analysis showed that TH expression remained unchanged in the SN during early time points (4 and 28 dpi) but reduced significantly at 56 dpi (Fig. 5H ). These findings show that the loss of DA neurons occurred earlier in the OB and very late in the SN following α-SOs injection, suggesting the region-specific differences in CSF-derived α-SOs-induced neurotoxicity. Fig. 5 DA neuron degeneration in the SN induced by ICV injection of α-SOs occurs only at later stages. A Representative images of sagittal brain sections showing TH + immunostaining in the brain of CON and α-SOs-treated mice at 56 dpi (dashed line indicates the position of the coronal sections in B – D ). B – D Representative images of coronal sections showing TH + immunostaining in the SN of CON and α-SOs-treated mice at 4 ( B ), 28 ( C ), and 56 dpi ( D ). Quantification of TH + cells in the SN of CON and α-SOs-treated mice at 4 ( E ), 28 ( F ), and 56 dpi ( G ). H Western blot analysis of TH protein levels in the SN at 4, 28, and 56 dpi, including representative blots and quantification. * P &lt; 0.05, ** P &lt; 0.01 vs CON, n = 3–6. P -values indicate significant differences calculated using the unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test ( E – G , H (28 dpi) and H (56 dpi)). Other P -values were calculated using the unpaired two-tailed Mann–Whitney test. ICV intracerebroventricular, α-SOs α-synuclein oligomers, DA dopaminergic, TH tyrosine hydroxylase, CON control, SN substantia nigra, dpi days post-injection. ICV injection of α-SOs induces early and persistent olfactory deficit and late motor dysfunction In clinical settings, olfactory deficits frequently precede motor symptoms in patients with PD. To investigate whether a similar temporal sequence of symptom onset exists in our model mice, we conducted a battery of behavioural tests to examine the olfactory function and motor function. First, mice performance in the unburied food test showed no intergroup differences throughout the testing period, effectively ruling out confounding factors related to motor impairment or motivational deficits (Fig. 6A ). In the buried food test (olfactory recognition test), α-SOs-treated mice exhibited relatively prolonged latency in locating hidden food particles compared to CON mice from 4 to 56 dpi (Fig. 6B ). In the female urine test (olfactory preference test), α-SOs-treated mice spent less time to sniff female mice urine compared to CON mice at 4 dpi, and this decrease in duration persisted until 56 dpi (Fig. 6C ). In the hexanone test (olfactory avoidance test), α-SOs-treated mice spent more time in the hexanone area than CON mice at 4 dpi, and this difference also continued up to 56 dpi (Fig. 6D ). Collectively, these findings demonstrate that ICV injection of α-SOs could induce acute and persistent olfactory dysfunction. Fig. 6 α-SOs-injected mice exhibit an early-onset and persistent olfactory deficit and late-onset motor dysfunction. A In the unburied food test, the latency to pellet was recorded at 4 ( n = 11), 14 ( n = 16), 28 ( n = 17), and 56 dpi ( n = 11) to assess olfactory localization ability for visible food cues. B In the buried food test, the latency to pellet was recorded at 4 ( n = 11), 14 ( n = 16), 28 ( n = 17), and 56 dpi ( n = 11) to assess odour-guided localization ability for hidden food. C In the olfactory preference test, the time that mice spent sniffing the filter paper soaked with female mouse urine was recorded at 4, 14, 28, and 56 dpi ( n = 11) to assess social odour recognition and preference ability. D In the olfactory avoidance test, the time that mice stayed in the area with the filter paper soaked with hexanone was recorded at 4, 14, 28, and 56 dpi ( n = 11) to assess olfactory avoidance ability for aversive odours. E In the pole test, the time taken by mice to descend the pole was recorded at 4 ( n = 13), 14 ( n = 10), 28 ( n = 12), and 56 dpi ( n = 16) to assess motor coordination and limb control. F In the rotarod test, the latency to fall from the rod was recorded at 4 ( n = 12), 14 ( n = 10), 28 ( n = 10), and 56 dpi ( n = 11) to assess motor balance, coordination, and endurance. * P &lt; 0.05, ** P &lt; 0.01, *** P &lt; 0.001 vs CON. P -values indicate significant differences calculated using the unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test ( A (4, 14, 56 dpi), B (56 dpi), C (4, 28, 56 dpi), D (14, 28 dpi), E (4, 28, 56 dpi)) and F (56 dpi). Other P -values were calculated using the unpaired two-tailed Mann–Whitney test. α-SOs α-synuclein oligomers, CON control, dpi days post-injection. In addition, motor coordination and balance of mice were evaluated using the pole and rotarod test. In contrast to the early-onset olfactory dysfunction, α-SOs-treated mice showed normal motor performance from 4 to 28 dpi and developed significant motor impairments at very late time point (56 dpi) (Fig. 6E, F ). The motor deficits were demonstrated by the increased descent time in the pole test (Fig. 6E ), and reduced latency in the rotarod test (Fig. 6F ). ICV injection of α-SOs induces olfactory pathology that progresses in a dose-dependent manner Next, we investigated whether reducing the dose of α-SOs could attenuate OB pathology. Mice were randomly allocated into three groups, including the α-SOs (dose, 3 μg), L-α-SOs (dose, 1 μg), and CON (PBS) groups. At 6 hpi, mice brain specimens were collected for immunostaining and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis. Representative images and quantitative analysis of coronal sections revealed robust glial activation in the OB of mice in the α-SOs group, with a significant increase in IBA1⁺ and GFAP⁺ signals compared to those in mice in the CON group. Conversely, L-α-SOs-treated mice exhibited no significant changes in IBA1⁺ and GFAP⁺ signal intensity in the OB compared to CON mice (Fig. 7A–D ). Consistently, Quantitative PCR analysis revealed that α-SOs treatment induced markedly elevated mRNA levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 relative to control treatment. However, low-dose α-SOs treatment did not induce significant cytokine elevation compared to control treatment (Fig. 7G ). Fig. 7 ICV injection of α-SOs induce dose-dependent neuroinflammation and DA neurons loss in the OB. Mice were randomly allocated into three groups, including the α-SOs, L-α-SOs, and CON groups. Immunofluorescence, quantitative PCR and western blot experiments were conducted to investigate olfactory pathology. A IBA1 + immunostaining reveals microglial changes (green) in the OB of mice at 6 hpi. B Quantification of IBA1 + fluorescence intensity in the OB. C GFAP + immunostaining reveals astrocytic changes (purple) in the OB of mice at 6 hpi. D Quantification of GFAP + fluorescence intensity in the OB. E Representative images of sagittal brain sections showing TH + immunostaining in the brain of mice at 28 dpi. F – H Representative images of coronal sections showing TH + immunostaining ( F ) and quantification of TH⁺ cell counts ( H ) in the OB(m) (Ⅰ, Ⅲ, Ⅴ) and OB(l) (Ⅱ, Ⅳ, Ⅵ) of mice at 28 dpi. G Quantitative PCR analysis of TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β transcriptional levels in the OB of mice. I Western blot analysis of TH protein levels in the OB of mice at 28 dpi, including representative blots and quantification. P &lt; 0.05, ** P &lt; 0.01, *** P &lt; 0.001 vs CON, n = 5–6. P -values were calculated using one-way ANOVA ( B , G (TNF-α and IL-6), H and I ). Other P -values were calculated using Kruskal–Wallis test. ICV intracerebroventricular, α-SOs α-synuclein oligomers, DA dopaminergic, TH tyrosine hydroxylase, CON control, OB olfactory bulb, hpi hours post-injection, dpi days post-injection, PCR polymerase chain reaction, TNF-α tumour necrosis factor- α, IL-6 interleukin-6, IL-1β interleukin1β. At 28 dpi, mice brain tissues were harvested. Immunofluorescence and western blot experiments were performed to evaluate dose-dependent neurotoxicity of α-SOs injection. Representative images of sagittal brain sections revealed reduced TH⁺ immunostaining in α-SOs-treated mice versus CON mice, whereas L-α-SOs-treated mice exhibited TH⁺ signal intensity comparable to that of CON mice (Fig. 7E ). Representative images and quantitative analysis of coronal sections demonstrated a significant decrease in TH⁺ neuron density in the OB(m) in α-SOs-treated mice, and preserved neuronal counts in L-α-SOs-treated mice relative to CON mice (Fig. 7F [Ⅰ, Ⅲ, Ⅴ], H). However, no significant difference in TH⁺ neuron populations was observed in the OB(l) among the three groups (Fig. 7F [Ⅱ, Ⅳ, Ⅵ], H). Furthermore, western blot analysis confirmed a significant reduction in TH protein levels in the OB of α-SOs-treated mice, while the levels remained comparable between L-α-SOs-treated and CON mice (Fig. 7I ). To assess dose–response behavioural effects of α-SOs on olfactory function, we conducted several olfactory behavioural tests. Quantitative analysis of the buried food tests revealed persistent deficits in odour-guided foraging in α-SOs-treated mice and preserved performance in L-α-SOs-treated mice comparable to that in CON mice at 4, 14, and 28 dpi. Conversely, the unburied food tests revealed no intergroup differences in retrieval latency throughout the testing period (Fig. 8A, B ). In the female urine test, α-SOs-treated mice spent significantly less time sniffing female mice urine compared to CON mice from 4 to 28 dpi, whereas L-α-SOs-treated mice showed no significant difference during this period (Fig. 8C ). Similarly, in the hexanone test, α-SOs-treated mice exhibited prolonged residence time in the hexanone zone from 4 to 28 dpi, whereas L-α-SOs-treated mice showed no significant difference compared to CON mice at the same time (Fig. 8D ). These data established that α-SOs-induced neurotoxicity is concentration dependent, and low-dose α-SOs administration was insufficient to trigger serious OB pathology and olfactory deficit. It also suggests that removal of α-SOs from CSF could represent a promising therapeutic strategy for preventing early PD-related neurodegeneration. Fig. 8 ICV injection of α-SOs induces dose-dependent olfactory dysfunction in mice. A In the unburied food test, the time taken by mice to find the food placed on the surface of bedding was recorded at 4, 14, and 28 dpi. B In the buried food test, the time taken by mice to find the buried food was recorded at 4, 14, and 28 dpi. C Time spent sniffing female urine-soaked filter paper in olfactory preference tests at 4, 14, and 28 dpi. D Time spent near hexanone-soaked filter paper in olfactory avoidance tests at 4, 14, and 28 dpi. ** P &lt; 0.01, *** P &lt; 0.001 vs CON, n = 10. P -values were calculated using the one-way ANOVA ( A (4 dpi), B , C (4 and 28 dpi), D (4 and 14 dpi)). Other P -values were calculated using Kruskal–Wallis test. ICV intracerebroventricular, α-SOs α-synuclein oligomers, dpi days post-injection. Discussion In this study, we provide the first evidence that α-syn spreads from CSF into the brain via PVSs, with significantly greater penetration in the OB than in the SN. ICV injection of α-SOs triggered early and sustained DA neuron loss in the OB, concomitant with olfactory dysfunction in mice. In contrast, motor deficits and DA neuron degeneration in the SN emerged only at later stages. Moreover, these pathological changes were associated with more pronounced glial activation and inflammatory cytokine production in the OB than in the SN. Reducing the dose of α-SOs attenuated neuroinflammation, DA neuron degeneration, and olfactory impairment. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that CSF-mediated α-SO propagation induces region-specific neurodegeneration and sequential symptom onset—mirroring the clinical progression of PD. Our findings further suggest that clearing α-SOs from CSF may represent a therapeutic strategy to delay PD progression. A schematic graph of the region-specific neurotoxicity induced by CSF-mediated α-SO dispersion is illustrated in Fig. 9 . Fig. 9 Schematic graph of the region-specific neurotoxicity induced by CSF-mediated α-SO dispersion. The spread of CSF-derived α-SOs via PVSs induces region-specific PD-like pathology. In particular, the OB exhibits a more abundant uptake of CSF-derived α-SOs, accompanied by a robust inflammatory response. The accumulation of α-SOs in the OB precipitates the premature death of TH + neurons, thereby triggering the early onset and persistent olfactory dysfunctions. In contrast, the SN experiences a minimal influx of CSF-derived α-SOs, along with a diminished inflammatory reaction. Consequently, TH + neurons die at a later stage, contributing to delayed onset of motor impairments. CSF cerebrospinal fluid, α-SOs α-synuclein oligomers, PVSs perivascular spaces, TH tyrosine hydroxylase, OB olfactory bulb, SN substantia nigra. As PD progresses, misfolded α-syn propagates through the brain in a characteristic spatiotemporal pattern, known as Braak staging. In the early stage, pathological α-syn aggregates typically emerge in the OB or lower brainstem from where they start propagating to other brain regions 21 . Aggregated α-syn is capable of trans-synaptic propagation in a prion-like fashion from affected to healthy neurons, triggering misfolding of endogenous α-syn and ultimately leading to neurodegeneration 22 . Surprisingly, in patients with PD, regions exhibiting the strongest synaptic connectivity with the SN, including the STR and globus pallidus externa, do not exhibit substantial LB 23 . This striking neuropathological discrepancy challenges the prevailing hypothesis that PD neurodegeneration primarily results from trans-synaptic spread of α-syn aggregates along neural circuits. Amounting studies have found that the levels of pathological α-syn, such as phosphorylated α-syn, α-SOs, and PFFs, are significantly increased in the CSF of patients with PD than in healthy individuals and patients with other neurological diseases 3 , 6 – 9 . These pathological α-syn in CSF likely originate from neurons in early lesion sites, which have been drained into the peripheral circulation through arachnoid granulations, meningeal lymphatic vessels, and other pathways 24 – 26 . An increasing number of studies have demonstrated that a large portion of CSF in the subarachnoid space flows back into the brain through PVSs and exchanges with the brain ISF (namely glymphatic system) 13 . In this study, we found that CSF-derived α-syn spread into the brain via PVSs, and this spread resulted in the loss of DA neurons in the OB and SN. These findings indicate that CSF influx via PVSs (or glymphatic influx) is an alternative non-synaptic pathway for the transmission of pathogenic α-syn and progression of PD lesions. Notably, although the concentration of pathological α-syn in CSF is relatively low, the large volume of CSF influx (accounting for more than 40% of the total subarachnoid CSF) 14 makes this transport pathway significant. Our study demonstrated that CSF-derived α-SOs can enter brain tissue via glymphatic transport and induce neuropathological changes. However, it should be noted that the glymphatic system is not the exclusive pathway mediating the spread of CSF-derived α-SOs. These oligomers may also disseminate through alternative routes, such as entering the brain parenchyma via the pia mater or draining to the nasal submucosa through the olfactory nerves, thereby causing neural injury 27 – 29 .To validate the causal relationship between glymphatic transport and pathology induced by CSF-derived α-SOs, glymphatic inhibition via AQP4 knockout or administration of specific inhibitor (e.g. TGN-020) could be employed in future study 14 , 30 – 32 . Theoretically, inhibiting glymphatic function would be expected to reduce the transport of CSF-derived α-SOs into the brain. However, it is important to note that such inhibition may also compromise the clearance of α-SOs already present in the brain. As a result, the overall impact of glymphatic suppression on PD pathology remains challenging to predict. Under physiological condition, the glymphatic system facilitates the removal of metabolic wastes and abnormal proteins from the brain and transporting essential nutrients and neuroactive substances from CSF to the brain 15 , 16 , 19 . However, our findings revealed that under pathological conditions, the glymphatic system may exert a detrimental effect on brain health by spreading pathogenic proteins such as α-SOs, suggesting that the glymphatic system may function as a double-edged sword. Thus, while it is capable of maintaining cerebral homeostasis, it can also facilitate disease progression. Whether the glymphatic system exerts a ‘beneficial’ or ‘detrimental’ effect primarily hinges upon the composition of CSF. Under physiological conditions, where CSF does not contain pathogenic substances, the glymphatic system plays a beneficial role in maintaining brain homeostasis. Conversely, in pathological states, due to the presence of pathogenic solutes (e.g., α-SOs) within CSF, the glymphatic system exerts an adverse effect by promoting lesion propagation. Thus, eliminating pathogenic substances from CSF may mitigate the detrimental effects of the glymphatic system, allowing the system’s protective functions to operate effectively. Motor symptoms are a hallmark of PD, occurring as a result of the progressive loss of DA neurons in the basal ganglia 1 . In addition to motor dysfunction, patients with PD experience debilitating non-motor symptoms. Among the earliest prodromal symptoms observed in patients with PD are olfactory deficits, which appear years before the onset of motor dysfunction 33 . Consistent with this clinical pattern, the OB is one of the initial brain structures to undergo α-syn deposition 21 , 34 , and the olfactory impairment shows good correlation with LB pathology in the OB 35 . Nevertheless, the mechanisms underlying the early deposition of α-syn in the OB remain poorly understood. In the current study, we reported that a single ICV injection of α-SOs in non-transgenic mice induced early and persistent olfactory dysfunction (within 4–56 dpi). Along with behavioural alterations, α-SOs-injected mice also showed a decreased TH immunoreactivity in the OB shortly after α-SOs administration, which persisted at least until 56 dpi. These findings align with those of previous studies showing disrupted dopamine content in the OB of animals subjected to ICV infusion of α-SOs 10 . Notably, we observed that a single ICV infusion of α-SOs-induced significant motor deficits and DA neuron loss in the SN only at later time points (56 dpi). This finding is in line with the more significantly increased levels of inflammatory markers (TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β) and microglia activation in the OB compared to the SN 6 h following ICV infusion of α-SOs. Thus, α-SOs-treated mice successfully developed non-motor and motor symptoms in a temporal sequence mirroring the clinical development of PD. Using two different 3D imaging techniques and other analyses following ICV or CM injection, we demonstrated that the transport of CSF-derived α-syn exhibits brain region specificity. The OB exhibited markedly greater α-syn uptake than other PD-related regions including the SN and STR, which is consistent with our previous study’s findings 36 . In the previous study, using fMOST and other analyses, we discovered that the glymphatic flow exhibits a regional preference. Cerebral regions (e.g. OB) with large penetrating arteries and/or adjacent to the subarachnoid space display robust CSF flow, whereas those with small penetrating arteries and/or located in the deep brain (e.g. SN) exhibit minimal CSF flow 36 . Additionally, this regional heterogeneity in the glymphatic flow aligns with the distribution of AQP4. AQP4 is highly expressed in the OB and CB; moderately in the thalamus, hypothalamus, and SN; and negligibly in the neocortex 37 , 38 . Based on these findings, we speculated that the OB preferentially takes up pathogenic α-syn from CSF, facilitating its initial deposition in this region and the subsequent development of olfactory impairment. More interestingly, our findings also revealed that the differences in CSF influx and its effects exist not only across different brain regions but also within a specific brain region. For instance, the influx of CSF-derived α-syn was more abundant into the OB(m) than in the OB(l), and DA neuron loss was significantly greater in the OB(m) than in the OB(l). Previous imaging studies on the glymphatic influx reveal that the lower–molecular weight tracers like ovalbumin (45 kDa), dextran-3 (3 kDa), and cadaverine (641 Da) pass from the PVSs to the brain interstitium via the 20-nm clefts between overlapping astrocytic endfeet 39 – 41 . Despite differences in molecular weight, these tracers exhibit highly similar pathways for brain entry and distribution patterns. The key difference is that the lower molecular weight tracers demonstrated a broader distribution within the brain compared to their higher molecular weight counterparts. Notably, extremely large tracers such as dextran (500 and 2000 kDa, hydrodynamic radius of ~15 and 27.5 nm, respectively) are confined in PVSs, and not able to enter the surrounding interstitial space due to the sieving effect of astrocytic endfeet 14 , 42 – 45 . In this study, both HF488–α-syn (14.5 kDa) and α-SOs (SPR484, 650–1200 kDa, diameters ranging from 3 to 16 nm (average: 6.8 ± 2.1 nm)) 46 are capable of reaching the brain interstitium through the clefts between astrocytic endfeet (Figs. 1 and 2 , Supplementary Fig. 1 ). Therefore, we postulate that HF488–α-syn imaging is capable of tracing the spreading routes and distribution profiles of both α-syn monomers and small oligomers. Oligomers are typically defined as soluble aggregates of an intermediate size, ranging from monomers to insoluble fibrils. Among them, small oligomers (smaller than 20 nm in diameter) may be highly cytotoxic due to their superior ability to permeate lipid membranes and induce more severe inflammation compared to larger aggregates 5 . Our findings delineate the brain entry pathways and pathogenic mechanisms of small oligomers, yet they do not apply to the spreading of larger aggregates (larger than 20 nm in diameter), which remain confined to the PVSs and cannot access the brain parenchyma. In the present study, DA neurons (TH + ) were chosen to be the primary observation target since their loss directly corresponds to core motor symptoms and early non-motor symptoms (e.g. olfactory dysfunction) of PD. Previous studies have confirmed that the toxicity of PD-related pathogenic proteins (e.g. α-SOs) exhibits significant neuronal subtype specificity 22 . Specifically, DA neurons are highly vulnerable in PD due to key traits including their long and highly branched axons, low calcium buffering capacity, and persistent mitochondrial oxidative stress 47 . These features collectively render them particularly sensitive to α-SO-induced calcium dyshomeostasis, mitochondrial damage, and protein aggregation 48 . In the OB, DA neurons are predominantly localised within the glomerular layer, which are situated at the entrance of the bulbar circuitry 49 . Thus, they directly interact with olfactory nerve terminals, supporting odour processing and bulbar network adaptation to external stimuli. Because glomerular DA neurons are located in the superficial OB, they are accessible to CSF flow and vulnerable to α-SOs toxicity. In contrast, DA neurons in the SN, situated in deeper brain regions, are less exposed to CSF flow and thus less affected by α-SOs. In addition to the OB, we also observed robust uptake of CSF α-SOs in the CB and VC. These brain regions are hypothesised to be more vulnerable to CSF-derived α-SOs toxicity, with their pathologies playing significant roles in PD, which warrant further investigation. In this study, we found that neuroinflammation, DA neuron loss, and olfactory deficit was alleviated when a low dose of α-SOs (1 µg) was administered, indicating that removal of α-SOs from CSF could slow PD progression. Accumulating studies have shown that direct removal of pathogenic solutes from CSF through CSF filtration/apheresis/replacement is helpful for some neurological conditions—a strategy referred to as the CSF–sink therapeutic strategy 50 , 51 . Since pathogenic proteins exist in an equilibrium between brain ISF and CSF, removing them from CSF favours their clearance from the ISF in their soluble state, thereby reducing their potential to aggregate within brain parenchyma 52 . Several studies have supported the benefits of CSF clearance. For example, CSF filtration effectively removes neurotoxic factors and reduces the neurotoxic capacity of CSF-derived from sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis subjects in vitro and a mouse model 51 . Furthermore, mechanical dilution of CSF has been long proposed as a potential therapeutic approach for AD. CSF shunts such as ventriculoperitoneal and lumboperitoneal shunts can delay the intracerebral deposition of Aβ in patients with communicating hydrocephalus 51 . Additionally, preclinical studies are underway to develop selective CSF clearance systems in combination with monoclonal antibodies (mAb) 53 . For instance, Coto-Vilcapoma et al. 53 developed an implantable device for continuous CSF apheresis, enabling the clearance of Aβ from CSF. After implanting the device into APP/PS1 mice, the continuous removal of soluble Aβ from CSF significantly reduced cortical Aβ plaques in mice. When considering PD, removing pathogenic α-syn, such as α-SOs, from CSF could potentially prevent its transmission and deposition in the brain, offering a promising therapeutic avenue. A recent clinical study reported that intravenous administration of MEDI1341, a monoclonal antibody targeting human α-syn, reduces levels of free α-syn in the CSF by more than 50%. The treatment also demonstrated a favourable safety profile 54 , 55 . Theoretically, MEDI1341 could be delivered intrathecally or used in CSF filtration device to bind CSF-derived α-SOs, preventing their perivascular entry into brain parenchyma and facilitating clearance. However, direct evidence supporting this approach in PD remains lacking, though a recent concept article has outlined the rationale for clearing CSF-derived α-syn as a novel strategy 56 . This study has a few limitations. To establish an animal model of PD, we administered a single ICV injection of α-SOs at a high dose (3 μg/kg). This resulted in high concentration of α-SOs in CSF reaching ~32,704 pg/ml, which is approximately 150-times higher than that in patients with PD (170.5–219.8 pg/ml) 57 . Such a high concentration is biologically implausible and, therefore, unsuitable for accurately modelling PD pathophysiology. To date, it remains unclear whether low-dose α-SO exposure (at the same level as α-SO in the CSF of PD patients) causes neuronal damage. To address this, employing an osmotic micropump system for chronic, low-dose α-SO delivery offers a more realistic and feasible approach to mimic PD pathogenesis 58 . Another limitation of this study is the absence of a treatment group. Compared to the high-dose α-SOs administration, mice receiving low-dose injection exhibited reduced neuroinflammation, DA neuron loss, and olfactory deficit, suggesting that removal of α-SOs from CSF may slow PD progression. Future research could employ transgenic mice overexpressing α-syn to investigate the therapeutic potential of CSF filtration/apheresis in directly removing pathogenic α-syn from CSF. In conclusion, we proposed that the spread of pathogenic α-syn from CSF via PVSs could induce PD-like pathology. Notably, the transmission of α-SOs into the OB was more substantial compared to that into the SN, which may account for the more severe neuroinflammation and damage to DA neurons in the OB. Furthermore, reducing the dose of α-SOs alleviated neuroinflammation, DA neuron loss, and olfactory dysfunction, suggesting that removing pathogenic α-syn from CSF could delay PD progression. Considering that CSF-derived α-syn aggregates are also elevated in dementia with Lewy bodies, multiple system atrophy, and rapid eye movement behavioural disorder, these findings may have broader implications in other synucleinopathies beyond PD. Methods Animals Male C57BL/6 mice (8–9 weeks old) were purchased from Shanghai Slack Experimental Animal Center and housed at Soochow University’s Animal Research Center under controlled conditions (temperature: 20–22 °C, relative humidity: 50–60%, 12 h light/dark cycle) with ad libitum access to food and water. Anaesthesia was induced via intraperitoneal injection of a mixture of ketamine (100 mg/kg; Li’An Medicine, Suzhou, China) and xylazine (10 mg/kg; Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Simple randomisation was used to allocate mice to control and treatment groups by using a computer-generated random number sequence. Sample sizes were determined based on our previous studies 10 . All animal procedures were approved by the Committee on Animal Resources of Soochow University. All experiments were performed following the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and the Animal Research: Reporting In Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE) guidelines. All investigators were blind to animal phenotypes and treatments. ICV injection According to a previous study 10 , α-syn oligomers (α-SOs, SPR484, StressMarq Biosciences, Victoria, Canada) were diluted in PBS (1 mg/mL or 0.33 mg/mL) and stereotaxically injected into the right lateral ventricle of anaesthetised mice at 1 μL/min (3 μL total volume, 3 μg [high dose] or 1 μg [low dose] protein) for 3 min. Equal volume of PBS was injected into the lateral ventricle of CON mice at the same speed. The coordinates used were as follows: −0.3 mm anteroposterior, −1.0 mm mediolateral, and 2.7 mm dorsoventral from the brain surface. In a separate experiment, HF488-α-syn (AS-55457, Anaspec, Fremont, CA, USA) or α-syn monomer (α-syn, SPR-321, StressMarq Biosciences Inc., Victoria, Canada) was diluted in PBS (0.1%) and injected into the right lateral ventricle at 1 μL/min (10 μL total volume, 10 μg protein) for 10 min. Subsequently, α-SOs, HF488-α-syn, and α-syn were allowed to circulate in the mouse brain for 20 min. In the experiment, animals that developed severe inflammation or died accidentally had their experimental data excluded from the study. CM injection Following anaesthesia, the CM was exposed as previously described 36 . A PE10 catheter connected to a 30 G needle was inserted, and HF488-α-synuclein (HF488-α-syn) (0.1%) was infused using a microinjection pump (LSP01-1A, Longer Precision Pumpat) at 1 μL/min (10 μL total volume) for 10 min. Subsequently, HF488-α-syn were allowed to circulate in the mouse brain for 20 min. FITC-lectin administration In order to delineate the brain vasculature, the anaesthetised mice were transcardially perfused with FITC-lectin (Lectin from Triticum vulgaris FITC Conjugate, Sigma: L4895, FITC-lectin) as described previously 31 , 41 . The FITC-lectin was mixed with cold PBS at a concentration of 0.02 mg/mL, and used immediately after it was ready. The injection was conducted at a rate of 2 mL/min for 10 min (20 mL total volume) before perfusion–fixation. Optical tissue clearing and light-sheet imaging Anaesthetised mice were transcardially perfused with ice-cold PBS followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). Brains were harvested and post-fixed in 4% PFA at 4 °C overnight, then washed twice with PBS at 25 °C for 2 h each. Fixed brain tissues were cleared using the Nuo Hai Enhanced Tissue Clearing Kit (NH-CR-230701, Nuohai, Shanghai, China). Three-dimensional fluorescence imaging was performed on a Nuo Hai LS18 Light Sheet Microscope with parameters set as follows: 4 light sheets, 1×/0.25 numerical aperture objective for fluorescence collection, 6.3× magnification, and 2 × 2 × 6 μm³ spatial resolution. Acquired data were registered with a brain atlas using Amira software to precisely localise brain regions, and data visualisation/analysis was conducted using Amira (Visage Imaging, AUS) and Imaris (Bitplane, Switzerland) software 59 . Tissue processing and fMOST imaging Tissue processing was performed as previously described 36 . Anaesthetised mice were transcardially perfused with PBS and 4% PFA. Brains were removed and fixed in 4% PFA overnight. Following PBS washes, tissues were dehydrated in a graded ethanol solution, soaked in xylene, and embedded at 60 °C. Brain specimens were imaged using the fMOST system (BioMapping5000, Wuhan OE-Bio Co., Ltd, Wuhan, China). Mice brains were mounted in the MOST automated data acquisition system and sequentially sectioned into coronal ultrathin slices (2 μm) from anterior to posterior. Raw fragment images (resolution: 0.35 × 0.35 × 2 μm) were subjected to stitching and brightness homogenisation, followed by two-dimensional (2D) and 3D reconstruction. Consecutive 50 slices were integrated into a single virtual slice (100 μm), yielding 125 reconstructed 2D whole-slice images spanning from the OB to the CB. Ex vivo fluorescence imaging Following ICV or CM injection of HF488-α-syn, mice were transcardially perfused with PBS and 4% PFA. Brains were harvested and post-fixed in 4% PFA at 4 °C overnight. Coronal brain slices (50 μm) were sectioned using a vibratome (VT1000S, Leica, Germany). Imaging was performed using a laser confocal microscope (TSC-SP8-SR, Leica, Germany) with image stitching, and mean fluorescence intensity was analysed using ImageJ. Tracer assays As previously described 60 , seven brain regions including the OB, STR, SN, CB, DC, LC, and VC were dissected. RIPA buffer (100 mg/ml, Beyotime, Shanghai, China) was added to these samples, which were then homogenised on ice. After centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C, the supernatants were transferred to a 96-well plate. The fluorescence intensity (excitation wavelength 490 nm, emission wavelength 525 nm) was measured using a microplate reader (Synergy NEO, BioTek, Burlington, VT, USA). The content of HF488-α-syn (ng/mg) was quantitatively analysed according to the standard curve. Buried food test According to a previous study 61 , prior to formal testing, mice were fasted for 24 h with free access to water. Fasted mice were habituated to a large cage (dimensions: 44 × 22 × 19 cm) containing 8 cm of fresh cage bedding for 10 min. After habituation, mice were temporarily removed, and food pellets (2.5 g, Shuangshi, Suzhou, China) were randomly buried at the bottom of the bedding. Mice were returned to the test cage, and timer was started. The timer was stopped when the mouse’s forepaws touched the food pellets. If a mouse failed to find the food pellet within 10 min, the latency was recorded as 600 s. Clean cages, fresh bedding, and fresh food pellets were used for each test. In the unburied food test, all other procedures were identical to the buried food test, with the exception that the food pellet was placed on the surface of bedding. Olfactory preference test/female mouse urine test According to a previous study 62 , mice were habituated to clean cage (25 × 18 × 13 cm) without bedding for 15 min, repeated over three sessions. After habituation, mice were placed in a testing cage containing two filter papers (2 × 2 cm). Female mouse urine (40 μL) was applied to one filter paper on one side of the cage, and distilled water (40 μL) was applied to the opposite filter paper. The time spent sniffing each filter paper was measured simultaneously for 3 min and recorded. Olfactory avoidance test/hexanone test All other procedures were identical to the female mouse urine test, with the exception that one filter paper was soaked in hexanone solution (40 μL, 158 mM, Macklin Biochemical, Shanghai, China), and the opposite filter paper was soaked in distilled water (40 μL). The time spent by mice in the hexanone-treated filter paper area was measured within 3 min and recorded. Rotarod test As previously described 63 , mice were placed on a rotating rod (ZH-600, Zhenghua, Chengdu, China). The speed was first adjusted to a constant 20 rpm for training. Mice underwent three daily training sessions per day for 3 consecutive days, with each session lasting 5 min with intervals of at least 2 h between sessions. Following training, the rotarod speed was adjusted to a constant accelerating speed of 0.1 rpm/s, from 0 to 40 rpm, over a 5-min period. The latency to fall from the rotarod was recorded for each mouse across three trials, with at least 30-min interval between trials. The average latency from the three trials was used as the final result. Pole test Mice were placed on a vertical pole (wrapped with gauze bandage, height 50 cm) and required to maintain an upright posture. The time taken for each mouse to descend to the base of the pole with all four limbs fully touching the ground was recorded. The average of three trials was recorded as the result. Prior to formal testing, each mouse underwent three training sessions with 6 h intervals between them. During each training session, mice were required to complete three climbing attempts. Immunofluorescence Brain tissues were fixed with 4% PFA and cut in slices (50 μm) using a vibratome. Immunofluorescence was performed as previously described 63 . In brief, the slices were placed in a new 24-well plate and blocked with a PBS solution containing 5% donkey serum and 0.5% Triton X-100 for 2 h. After washing the slices three times with PBS, specific primary antibodies were added, and the slices were incubated overnight at 4 °C. Rabbit anti-TH antibody (1:500, AB152, Millipore, Boston, MA, USA), mouse anti-α-syn antibody (1:500, 36–008, Millipore, Boston, MA, USA；1:500, ab1903, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), rabbit anti-IBA1 antibody (1:500, 019-19741, WaKo, Osaka, Japan), mouse anti-GFAP antibody (1:500, 12389, CST, Boston, MA, USA), and mouse anti-NeuN antibody (1:500, 12389, CST, Boston, MA, USA) were used. After washing with PBS, fluorescent secondary antibodies were added, and the slices were incubated at 25 °C for 2 h in the dark. Cy3-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit (1:800, 711-165-152, Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA, USA) and FITC-conjugated donkey anti-mouse antibodies (1:800, 715-095-150, Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA, USA) were used. After being washed with PBS, the slices were incubated with a PBS solution containing DAPI (1:1000, 10236276001, Millipore, Boston, MA, USA) at 25 °C for 10 min and washed. The slices were mounted. Detection was carried out using a laser confocal microscope (TSC-SP8-SR, Leica, Germany). Quantification of TH-positive neurons in the SN and OB was performed in a blinded manner. Briefly, images were captured under identical exposure conditions and analysed using ImageJ software. For each experimental set, a uniform intensity threshold was established via the Image/Adjust function to optimally distinguish individual neurons. This pre-determined threshold was then applied consistently to all images within the same experiment. Finally, the area corresponding to the signal intensity range defined by the threshold was quantified with the “Analyse Particles” module. Western blot The OB and SN were processed for Western blot as previously described 63 . Briefly, total protein extracts were separated using 12% gel electrophoresis and transferred onto a PVDF membrane. The membrane was incubated with a TBST solution containing 5% non-fat milk at 25 °C for 2 h. After being washed, specific primary antibodies were added and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Rabbit anti-TH antibody (1:1000), rabbit anti-GAPDH antibody (1:10000), and mouse anti-α-syn antibody (1:1000) were used. After another three washes, rabbit anti-IgG H&amp;L-HRP (1:5000) was added and incubated at 25 °C for 2 h. Finally, detection was carried out using electrochemiluminescence. The membrane was observed using an electronic film imager (Touch Imager, e-BLOT, shanghai, China), and density calculations were carried out using ImageJ. Quantitative real-time PCR The mRNA levels of IL-6, TNF-α, and IL-1β in samples from the OB and SN were detected using a CFX96 real-time PCR detection system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), with β-actin as the internal reference gene. The procedure was performed as follows: total RNA was extracted using the TRIZOL and reverse-transcribed into cDNA. Each cDNA sample was amplified with SYBR Premix Ex Taq II in a 20 μL reaction volume containing 500 nM final concentration of each primer. The thermal cycling protocol included an initial denaturation at 95 °C for 30 s, followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 10 s and 60 °C for 30 s. After the amplification was completed, target genes were normalised and relatively quantified using the 2 −△△Ct described previously. Specific primer sequences are listed in Table 1 . Table 1 Sequences of the primers used in this study Gene Sequences TNF-α Forward primer ACGGCATGGATCTCAAAGAC Reverse primer AGATAGCAAATCGGCTGACG IL-1β Forward primer CACCTCACAAGCAGAGCACAAG Reverse primer GCATTAGAAACAGTCCAGCCCATAC IL-6 Forward primer TAGTCCTTCCTACCCCAATTTCC Reverse primer TTGGTCCTTAGCCACTCCTTC β-actin Forward primer AAATCTGGCACCACACCTTC Reverse primer GGGGTGTTGAAGGTCTCAAA Statistical analysis Statistical analysis was performed using Prism v.9.0 (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA, USA). All data are expressed as the mean ± standard error of the mean. The Student’s unpaired t test was used for parametric analyses of two groups, and the Mann–Whitney U -test was used for non-parametric analyses, as determined using the Shapiro–Wilk normality test. One-way analysis of variance was used for parametric analyses of three or more groups. The Kruskal–Wallis test was used for non-parametric analyses, as determined using the Shapiro–Wilk normality test. Values of P &lt; 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Supplementary information Supplementary material Supplementary Video 1 Supplementary Video 2