Dementia, cognitive impairment in Nigerians aged 90 years or older: A 20-year follow up of survivors of Ibadan study of aging cohort

Objective: Studies of dementia involving the oldest old are few in Sub-Saharan Africa. Survivors of the Ibadan arm of the Indianapolis-Ibadan Dementia Project who were enrolled in 1992 or 2001 were re-examined between 2021 and 2022. Aim: To revisit these subjects and evaluate them for the presence of cognitive and functional impairment and assign diagnoses as relevant as well as determine factors that mitigate development of dementia and cognitive impairment and thus promote healthy aging. Design: Evaluation consisted of the CERAD neuropsychological battery, an informant interview, and a clinical examination by physicians with expertise in cognitive disorders of aging. Diagnoses were adjudicated by consensus between psychiatrists and neurologists using ICD-10 and DSM-IV criteria and diagnosis of Mild Cognitive Impairment based on the National Institute of Aging- criteria Result: One hundred and thirty-five of the original 4425 persons ever recruited were re-evaluated. Mean age was 93·0 ±2·8 years (range 89–106 years); 103 (76 %) were females, 29 (21 %) were diagnosed dementia, 25 (18 %) had AD, 44 (32·6 %) had diagnosis of Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and 62 (45·9 %) were cognitively normal. Using logistic regression model for the combined dementia and MCI group with predictor variables collected during the 2001 evaluation wave, we found that cognitive score (Odds Ratio (OR)= 0·94, p = 0·024 (95 % CI:0.09–0.99), diastolic blood pressure (OR=1·04, p = 0·015 (95 % CI:1.01–1.07) and regular alcohol use (OR=0·42, p = 0·041(95 % CI:0.18–0.96) were associated with 20-year prevalence of cognitive impairment after adjusting for age, sex, and education. ApoE4 allele was neither a risk factor for dementia nor Cognitive Impairment in this cohort. Conclusion: Prevalence of cognitive impairment in this oldest old survivor cohort was associated with cognitive performance, diastolic blood pressure and regular use of alcohol 20 years before.

Introduction The oldest old group described as 80, years or older is the fastest growing age group in High income Countries (HIC) and with that has the highest number of people living with dementia, since prevalence rate and incidence of dementia rise exponentially from the age of 65 years and above [ 36 , 44 ]. The situation in the Low- and Middle-Income Countries (LMIC) might be slightly different in the sense that though dementia rate is highest in the oldest old they are not likely to be the fastest growing segment of that society. The median age of Nigerian population for example is 18.1 years compared to 45.5 and 48.2 years respectively for Germany and Italy (worldometer.nd), [ 42 ] a likely deduction is that the Nigerian population is skewed towards younger age group and the oldest old are unlikely to be the fasted growing group. In the last 30 years substantial progress had been made on dementia research in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Important studies came out of many countries in the region. Tabe 1 shows a list of community based epidemiological studies, which were 2 stage surveys incorporating a screening phase and a clinical evaluation phase, The clinical phase usually involves the use of neuropsychological tests and diagnoses by standard criteria like the DSM. The age range of individuals in these studies is from 60 or 65 years to 85 years and over. Prevalence estimates for dementia in SSA ranged from 2.3 % to 8.1 % in population cohorts aged 65 years and older Hendrie et al. [ 15 ] Guerchet et al. [ 9 , 10 ], Yusuf et al. [ 46 ], Logdon et al. [ 25 ], Ogunniyi et al. [ 30 ]. From these studies, analyses of population aged 80 or 85 years and over recorded rates ranging from 6.0 % to 25 % ( Table 1 ) Studies estimating Cognitive Impairment/ Mild Cognitive Impairment are less frequent, Guerchet et al., [ 10 ], Ogunniyi et al., [ 30 ] recorded rates ranging from 10.4 % –25 % for whole population aged 65 years and above; and 26.6 % to 44.9 % for those aged 80 or 85 years and above ( Table 1 ). A meta-analysis of pooled data from studies on dementia in SSA reported prevalence estimate of age-specific dementia in people aged 60 years and over as 6.38 %, doubling with every 7.2-year increment in age, sex was also a risk factor. A two-fold increased mortality risk for people living with dementia was also observed and the strongest evidence on modifiable risk factors was the association of dementia with vascular risks. Guerchet et al. [ 11 ]. An important observation from Table 1 is the exponential rise in the prevalence of dementia in the oldest old (80 or 85 years or older) in the SSA, Same phenomenon has been observed in prevalence and incidence studies in the HIC [ 36 ] Brumback-Peltza et al., [ 5 ], hence the need to study this age group in all racial groups and cultures. However relatively small percentage of the population are in the oldest old group in virtually all population-based studies recruiting people aged 65 years and older. Few studies have estimated prevalence rates of dementia in exclusively oldest old population, such include Corrada et al., [ 7 ] and Yaffe et al. [ 43 ] Investigations on dementia in the oldest old in HICs also involves lifestyle, neuroimaging, and post mortem studies among others. Pierce and Kawas [ 31 ], based on post-mortem studies and neuroimaging observed that aside from the oldest old having the highest prevalence rate and incidence of dementia, they also have a high percentage of people without dementia exhibiting Alzheimer Disease (AD) related pathologies or changes associated with other dementias including hippocampal sclerosis, Lewy bodies, age-related tauopathy and microinfarcts. Iacono et al., [ 20 ] from their longitudinal study (Nun study) observed that some participants with documented normal clinical status shortly before death had substantial AD lesion at autopsy comparable with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and even AD. Mean age at death for the group was 87.6 years. Although, these studies are mainly in Non-Hispanic Whites in Europe and North America, they are crucial to our understanding of the processes of brain aging. Despite all reports about higher risk for dementia, substantial percentage of the oldest old in SSA and worldwide are free of dementia and other cognitive disorders. Ogunniyi et al., [ 30 ]. had 69 persons aged 85 years and over in their study and 31(45 %) had neither dementia nor MCI. As Qiu and Fratigloni (2018) [ 33 ] pointed out, a good percentage of oldest old remain cognitively normal and it is important to examine factors associated with resilience to developing dementia in them. Recently Powell et al., [ 32 ] in a meta-analysis on defining exceptional cognition in older adults stated that: lack of cognitive deterioration over time, equivalent cognitive abilities to younger adults and exceptional cognitive ability for age are concepts that could be considered for cognitive aging. Other terminologies used for exceptional cognition include healthy aging, successful cognitive aging, and superagers. There are however differences in definition, but the most recent in the group the superagers are a subset of people aged ≥ 80 years; diagnosed normal in cognitive testing but with episodic memory and non-memory z-scores within one standard deviation of the mean of participants. Trammell [ 38 ]. Thus, there is no uniformity in the definition of positive cognitive aging. Various conditions can impinge on the performance of oldest old and thus affecting diagnosis of dementia or cognitive decline; as reported by Brumback-Peltza et al., [ 5 ] and Salvin et al., [ 36 ] such include sensory loss, comorbid medical conditions, disability, fatigue, frailty and cultural environment and expectation. A key diagnostic requirement for dementia in DSM-IV criteria; is decline in cognitive functions which is severe enough to cause impairment in daily functioning. Operationalizing this may be difficult because determining previous level of function in the oldest old could be influenced by comorbid medical illnesses, low level of schooling and some cultural norms about what is expected of the oldest old in performance of activities of daily life in a multigenerational living environment. For example, a comment from a close relation that “her memory is good for her age leaves many questions unanswered. What is the standard memory performance or functional ability for ”her age” that will indicate impairment in a multi- generational living environment like we have in Nigeria? Secondly, there are limited normative values for the oldest old in most questionnaires used in dementia research, this is another unmet requirement in research in dementia of the oldest old the word over. Whittle et al. [ 40 ] published normative data in the 90 + years study, but that was in educated Caucasian cohort, most other normative studies are in cohorts aged 65 years and above which contain a small percentage of oldest old. Low education and various cultural nuances are things that needed to be handled appropriately in research in this group. In our longitudinal study spanning 20 years, our group attempted to address these various challenges by developing appropriate and culture relevant questionnaires as well as modifying existing standard questionnaires to make them more culturally and educationally fair. Finally, we assessed the reliability of these measures and generated normative values for people 65 years and older. Additionally, we had reported on prevalence, incidence, risk factors for dementia, mortality, and genetic explanation of the basis to lower risk of dementia in our cohort [ 8 , 12 , 15 , 16 , 18 ]. We had an opportunity of filling some gaps left in dementia research in this region by revisiting participants in the Ibadan arm of the Indianapolis-Ibadan Dementia study, a cohort that has now turned 90 years and over from July 2021 to February 2022. Objectives The aim of this study was to revisit and evaluate cognitive and functional abilities among surviving participants from our original Indianapolis-Ibadan Dementia Study and assign diagnosis. A second aim was to examine the characteristics of those who remained cognitively normal with an emphasis on factors collected over time. Methodology Setting Participants Participants of the current study are survivors of the Ibadan cohort of the Indianapolis-Ibadan Dementia Study. The Indianapolis-Ibadan Dementia study was a longitudinal study of risk factors for dementia in older African Americans living in Indianapolis and older Nigerians from Ibadan, Nigeria. Details on the study are published elsewhere ([ 8 , 15 , 16 ]); a summary of the process is presented here. In 1992, 2486 individuals aged 65 years and older were enrolled in Ibadan as original cohort. In 2001, the project conducted another wave of recruitment where the age cut-off of 70 years was chosen for the new cohort to maintain comparability with the 1992 cohort since the youngest participants in the original cohort had since turned 70. In Ibadan, a house-to-house census was conducted, and 1939 community dwelling Yoruba aged 70 years and older were recruited during the 2001 wave. This study is in a population with little schooling, many of our participants did not know their date of birth; for such date of birth was estimated from a table of historical events well known to the population. Ogunniyi, Osuntokun [ 29 ] This is a well-tested practise in Nigeria. Estimate of date of birth recorded in either1992 or 2001 was used at various waves of the study and new estimates were not made each time. The study conducted longitudinal evaluations every 2 to 3 years between 1992–2009. Participants in 1992 cohort were evaluated in 1992, 1995,1998,2001,2004,2007 and 2009 with up to 7 evaluations per individual. Participants in 2001 cohort were evaluated in 2001,2004,2007 and 2009 with up to 4 evaluations per individual. A two-phrase study design (screening followed by clinical evaluation) was used at each evaluation. Phase 1-Screening At the onset, community dwellers in Idikan and contiguous wards in Ibadan were screened using the Community Screening Interview for Dementia (CSI-D [ 13 ]). The CSI-D consists of subject and relative sections; and it assesses cognitive functioning and activities of daily life. It also asks about life style, (including use of alcohol and cigarette) as well as medical history from both the subject and relative. During the screening the interviewer measured the blood pressure of the subject at specific scheduled points on 3 occasions and weight and height also taken to determine body mass index (BMI). Questions on alcohol usage are: Was there ever a period when you drank alcoholic beverages regularly? For the informant: Was there ever a period when the subject drank alcoholic beverages regularly? If either said yes, we took it as yes. Otherwise, if at least 1 said no, it was no. Scores on the CSI-D were classified into good, intermediate, and poor performances. All participants with poor performance; 50 % of those with intermediate performance and 5 % of good performance were selected for clinical evaluation. Norms for the CSI-D has been established with optimum cut off point. Hall [ 14 ]. Phase II-Clinical Evaluation In this phase neuropsychological testing was done using modified form of the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer Disease (CERAD) battery [ 27 ], and an informant interview. Shen et al. [ 37 ] in which someone who lives with or knows the subject was asked about his/her cognitive abilities, performance on activities of daily life, life style, and medical history. The Geriatric Depression Scale [ 43 ] was also administered. A physician later visited the participants at home, during which a physical examination including neurological examination was carried out. During this period, a semi-structured home interview to directly assess function in cognitively impaired elderly people (CHIF) [ 17 ] was administered to the participants. In one of the waves, the Stick Design Test [ 3 ] was introduced to replace the CERAD Constructional Praxis tasks as participants with little or no formal education were uncomfortable with the use of pencil and paper. Finally, consensus diagnosis was assigned by a team consisting of neurologists, psychiatrists, psychologists, and nurses. We had developed normative values for CERAD indicating cut off scores for impairment [ 12 ] Inputs for the consensus diagnosis team included ratings on the informant interview. Shen et al. [ 37 ] scores on CERAD [ 27 ], and physician examination findings. At each subsequent wave those diagnosed with dementia were no longer followed, those diagnosed with MCI were included in Clinical Assessment Phase II, and others (Normal and unselected for clinical assessment after screening) went through the process of screening and clinical assessment. Follow-up study 2021-2022 At the end of the initial Indianapolis-Ibadan Study in 2011, 2763 of the 4425 participants had died during the project, leaving 1662 individuals in the presumptive survivor group for this follow-up study. Our follow-up consisted of visiting the last known homes of these individuals. To assist us we used polaroid pictures of participants which we had taken at time of recruitment and kept on file. On arrival at the participants homes, family members, neighbours, or others who knew the participant were informally surveyed and able to tell us if the participant was alive, moved, or deceased. For those deceased we gathered information on time, date, place, and circumstances of death via a short verbal autopsy when practicable; the respondent being a close family member present with subject at the time of death. There is no reliable death register around study area and death certificate is not a prerequisite for burial in all circumstances; so verbal autopsy is our method of confirming death. Those who had moved to other locations were traced to the new address. For those subjects who were still alive and agreeable to participation, we administered a comprehensive clinical evaluation in their home. This evaluation consisted of the CERAD Neuropsychological Battery [ 27 ] (without the Constructional Praxis test), a structured informant interview (Shen et al., 2006), the Stick Design Test, [ 3 ] and the Geriatric Depression Scale. Yesavage [ 45 ]. In addition, all participants had a physical (including neurological) examination during which the CHIF [ 17 ] was administered. All clinical data was reviewed by a consensus panel consisting of clinical staff as well as geriatric psychiatrists and neurologists. The inputs, as described earlier in the original study section, included ratings and scores on the CERAD battery, the structured informant interview, CHIF, and Physician’s examination report. Consensus diagnoses were derived using DSM-IV-TR (APA 2000) [ 2 ] and ICD-10 Criteria (WHO 1992) [ 41 ] for diagnosis of dementia, NINCDS-ADRA criteria [ 26 ] (AD Dementia), Vascular dementia [ 34 ], and National Institute of Aging criteria [ 1 ] (Mild Cognitive Impairment). As observed by Brumback-Peltza et al., [ 5 ] and Salvin et al., [ 36 ], diagnosis of dementia and Mild Cognitive Impairment may be problematic in the oldest old. We ensured fidelity by re-hiring as many of our field workers as possible, retraining them along with new ones, use of education and culture fair, questionnaires, assessment in patient homes and additional assessment by a physician. Ethical Clearance: Approval was granted by the University of Ibadan/University College Hospital Ethics Committee for both initial and follow up study. In all the waves of the initial study and during the follow up study all participants signed an Informed consent or thumb printed to show that they agreed. Data sources/measurement Data on participants’ demographics including age, sex, and education were retrieved from the original study. In addition, data collected during the 2001 evaluation were included in our analyses. These included history of medical conditions, smoking, and regular alcohol use. Medical history included diabetes, depression, cancer, hypertension, stroke, Parkinson’s disease, and heart disease. History of medical condition reported by either the participant or relative during CSI-D administration was used. We also included cognitive scores from the CSI-D collected during the 2001 study wave. These include the cognitive memory score, cognitive semantic score, cognitive executive score, and total cognitive score (summation of all three scores). In addition, body mass index (BMI, weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared) and systolic, and diastolic blood pressures collected at the 2001 study wave were also included. The latter were collected by trained interviewers who performed SBP and DBP measurements from the left arm (Omron digital units, Omron Health-Care Inc., Bannockburn, IL) at approximately 15-minute intervals while the participant was seated. The average of the three BP measurements was used in all analyses. Apolipoprotein E ( ApoE ) genotypes were collected as specified by Corder et al., [ 6 ], who described gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 and the risk of Alzheimer disease in late onset families. DNA was extracted from blood spots collected on filter paper and from fresh blood using standard procedures from participants who consented to the procedure at or before 2001wave. ApoE genotypes were determined by Hhal digestion of amplified products [ 19 ]. Further details available in Hendrie et al. [ 18 ] ApoE status previously determined was used in this analysis., Statistical analysis Analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Fisher’s exact tests were used to compare participants’ demographic characteristics and neuropsychologic test scores among the three groups diagnosed with dementia, MCI, or normal. Participants diagnosed with dementia or MCI were combined into a cognitive impairment group. T-tests and Fisher’s exact tests were used to compare cognitively impaired participants to those diagnosed as cognitively normal on participants’ demographic, medical conditions, cognitive scores, BMI, and blood pressure measures collected at the 2001 study wave. Logistic regression models were used to identify predictors for cognitive impairment. Predictors significant at the alpha= 0·15 level in univariate models were included in multiple logistic regression models. Backwards selection model fitting was used to identify a final multiple logistic regression model with all variables significant at the alpha= 0·05 level. Covariates including age, sex and school attendance were added to this final model. Result Participants Of the 1662 participants who were thought to be alive at the end of the Indianapolis-Ibadan Dementia Study in 2011, 136 were available for evaluation. Of this group, one person refused to participate. Of the remaining 1526 participants 68 were confirmed dead by verbal autopsy. The rest were either reported deceased and verbal autopsy could not be done or lost to follow-up ( Fig. 1 ). Among the 135 survivors included in this analysis, 26 were in the original cohort of 1992 and 109 were in the new cohort of 2001. Median follow-up from enrollment was 19·6 years; The mean follow-up is 21·4 years from initial study evaluation and 19·6 years from 2001. Of the 135 surviving participants evaluated in 2021, 45 had been selected for clinical evaluation during various waves in the original study; 4(8.9 %) were diagnosed as CI while the remaining 41(91.1 %) were diagnosed as cognitively normal. Importantly, at the 2001 screening phase, only 2 participants were screened into the “poor” performance group, while the rest were into the good performance group (n = 129) (97 %), or intermediate group (n = 2) (1.5 %) Therefore, most of those diagnosed with dementia or MCI at this follow-up evaluation had good cognitive performance at the last assessment Table 2 . Descriptive data. Mean age was 93·0 ±2·8 years (range 89–106 years; 103 (76 %) were females and only 13 % ever attended school. From clinical assessment of the 135 participants at 2021, 62 (46 %) were diagnosed as normal, 44 (33 %) were diagnosed with MCI, and 29 (22 %) were diagnosed with dementia. Among those with dementia 25 diagnosed with AD and four were diagnosed with Vascular dementia. Descriptive data describing participant characteristics and mean neuropsychologic scores by diagnosis are presented in Table 3 . Geriatric Depression Scale mean scores in 2021 were significantly different between groups with severity of depression increasing from cognitively normal through MCI to Dementia (6·8 ± 4·8 vs. 7·8 ± 5·6 vs. 11·0 ± 6·2, respectively; p = 0·0028). Predictors of cognitive impairment Table 4 presents univariate comparisons between individuals with cognitive impairment (individuals diagnosed with dementia or MCI) and those diagnosed as cognitively normal on demographic variables, medical history, and cognitive scores collected at the 2001 evaluation wave. Variables with p &lt; 0.15 are included in a multivariable model. The two groups did not differ on any of the demographic variables or the presence of medical conditions. Of the 81 persons with ApoE genotypes, 24 (30 %) had at least one ApoE-4 allele; however, only three (4 %) were homozygous. Neither presence of at least one ApoE-4 allele nor number of copies differed between the two groups (p = 0·47 and p = 0.77, respectively). We also analyzed the data separately for dementia, MCI, and normal groups, but APOE status was not associated with these three-group outcomes. Table 4a . presents APOE genotype frequencies by allele and e4 carrier status, showing that participants with MCI had e4 allele frequencies similar to those with dementia. There were no differences between the groups overall (p = 0.7805) nor with e4 carriers (p = 0.7413). Participants in the cognitive impairment group had significantly lower cognitive test scores and higher systolic and diastolic blood pressures at the 2001 evaluation time. We included age, sex, and education in the final logistic model, as well as regular alcohol use, cognitive test scores, and blood pressure variables as potential predictors of cognitive impairment. Table 5 shows the final model for cognitive impairment. Higher diastolic blood pressure in 2001 [OR 1·04 (95 % CI: 1·01–1·07)] was significantly associated with higher risk for cognitive impairment. Higher total cognitive score in 2001 [OR 0·94 (95 % CI: 0·90–0·99)] and regular use of alcohol in 2001 [OR 0·42 (95 % CI: 0·18–0·96)] were associated with lower risk for cognitive impairment. Age, sex and school attendance were not significantly associated with cognitive impairment (p &gt; 0.05). Discussion To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on dementia in a cohort that is exclusively in the oldest old group in SSA and it is also the longest follow-up of any community-based cohort study on dementia in the region. Only 3 % of the original cohort was available for evaluation in 2021 with minimum age being 89 years, 76 % females, and 13 % ever attended school. The frequencies of Dementia and Alzheimer disease at 22 % and 19 % respectively are higher than the frequency of ~2 % for both Dementia and AD, Hendrie et al., [ 15 ] earlier reported in those 65 years and older. The prevalence rate is in keeping with the reported exponential rise in prevalence in the oldest old as demonstrated in Table 1 . However, in their meta-analysis of studies for the region Guerchet et al., [ 11 ] reported age specific prevalence of ~5 % for all ages 60 years and above and ~18 % for 85 + years for those studies where DSM criteria were used for diagnosis; a figure close to 22 % in this study. There are few studies on populations aged 90 years worldwide, however Corrada et al., [ 7 ] reported that overall prevalence of all-cause dementia was higher in women 45 %, than men, 28 %. Prevalence rate doubled every 5 years for women but not men. In the Women Cognitive Impairment Study of Exceptional Aging, women aged 85 + years were studied [ 43 ]. Mean age of participants was 88.2 years and 27 % were ≥ 90 years; 18 % were diagnosed with dementia and 23 % with MCI. Comparing women 90 years and over with those 85–89 years, the frequency of dementia was 28 % vs. 14 %, p &lt; 0.0001, while the frequency of MCI was 24 % vs. 23 %, p = 0.02. In the few studies with standardized diagnosis of cognitive impairment in SSA prevalence rates were 26.6 % for 80 years and older (Guerchet et.al., (2008) and between 27.9 % and 44.9 % in those aged 85 years and older Guerchet et al., [ 10 ], Ogunniyi et al., [ 30 ]. Clearly, more research is needed in this group of people older than 90 years. Our observed frequencies of 22 % for dementia and 33 % for MCI are close to expectation for this age group going by previous reports, Table 3 showed that mean depressives symptoms score as measured in 2021 using Geriatric Depression Scale [ 45 ] was significantly associated with MCI and dementia. Richard et al., [ 35 ] reported that depression was associated with MCI and dementia in their community-based study and MCI co-existing depression had a higher risk of progression to dementia. We combined dementia and MCI in this group primarily to compare them with the cognitively normal group. As Qiu and Fratigloni [ 33 ] observed, it is necessary to pay attention to those who remain cognitively healthy in the oldest old group. The relationship between cognitive scores in the year 2001 and the follow-up clinical assessment in 2021 is shown in Table 4 . Both diastolic and systolic blood pressures measured in 2001 had significant relationships with cognitive impairment in 2021. Developing dementia and MCI (Cognitively Impairment) was related to higher BP reading even 20 years before. In this report, only diastolic blood pressure in 2001 was significantly associated with 20-year cognitive impairment risk in a multiple logistic regression model. Some research reports indicate that high blood pressure is associated with dementia or cognitive impairment while others say low blood pressure is associated [ 24 ]. A recent meta- analysis by Lennon et al. [ 23 ] with data from 15 different countries showed that people with untreated hypertension have high risk of developing dementia, while those whose hypertension was effectively treated, had no risk for developing dementia. Hypertension was poorly treated in people in this cohort and the lack of a relationship with systolic blood pressure may be due to the small sample size. It can be seen from Table 4 those who were cognitively impaired in 2021 had lower mean cognitive scores in 2001 compared with those who remained cognitively-normal Mossakowska et al., [ 28 ] reported that in a Polish cohort, cognitive performance and functional status are major factors associated with survival in centenarians, while laboratory biochemical parameters had no effect. From the Nun study, Iacono et al., [ 20 ] reported that intellectual abilities measured when participants were in their early 20 s predicted the likelihood of remaining cognitively normal 5 or 6 decades later, even in the presence of substantial AD pathology. According to the authors higher idea density scores in early life were associated with intact cognition in late life even in the presence of AD lesions. In the meta-analysis by Powell et al. [ 32 ] lack of cognitive deterioration over time, equivalent cognitive abilities to younger adults and exceptional cognitive ability for age are concepts that could be considered for successful cognitive aging; and lack of cognitive deterioration over 20 years being the most important factor in this group. That is supported by the fact that 129 of 133 persons screened in 2001 (97 %) were in the good performance group and mean cognitive score from that screening phase discriminated between normal and cognitive impairment 20 years later. The protective effect of alcohol in our analysis was only related to whether the participant drank regularly or not. As shown in Table 4 , about half of those diagnosed normal and one-third of those diagnosed CI respectively, drank alcoholic beverages regularly for a period. Secondly, the elders of Idikan, Ibadan the site of our study, are not regular drinkers for religious and cultural reasons and a positive response regarding drinking is most likely reflective of low intake. In a review of epidemiological data on use of alcohol, Visiontay et al. [ 39 ] posit that low and moderate consumption of alcohol is promotive of cognitive functioning and prevention of dementia. A meta-analysis showed that both men and women with moderate alcohol consumption had better cognition than current non-drinkers (better in women) whereas high consumption elevated dementia risk. Brennan [ 4 ]. Our group had previously established that ApoE4 has a weak risk effect for AD in Nigerians. Hendrie [ 18 ] Specifically, we found an association between carriers of double ApoE4 allele but not the single allele. Although the same trend is observed in this study and it is important to determine the risk effect of ApoE4 in a cohort of oldest old in Nigeria but our analysis might be underpowered because of the small sample size. However, ApoE4 allele is not a risk factor for either dementia or cognitive impairment in this cohort ( Table 4 &amp; 4a ). ApoE4 had been reported less prevalent in the oldest old (probably because of a differential survival effect) and is not associated with incident dementia in the oldest old [ 21 ]. Earlier study by our group on ApoE4 and mortality showed no difference between e4 carriers and non e4 carriers in Ibadan, but a significant difference was found only in African Americans in Indianapolis below 75 years of age.[ 22 ] Several reports on successful cognitive aging or superagers indicate that ApoE4 in not a risk factor for AD in the oldest old with successful cognitive aging [ 32 ]. In summary, major findings from this study suggest that the ability to remain cognitively normal in 90 years and older members of this cohort is associated with higher premorbid cognitive functioning, lower mean blood pressure, and periodic alcohol use. With respect to cognitive functioning, 129 of 133 persons screened in 2001 were in the better performance group. Secondly, even mean cognitive scores discriminated between those diagnosed either normal or cognitively impairment 20 years later. Additionally, a total of 45 participants in this cohort were selected for second phase clinical evaluation during various waves of the study and at their last diagnosis 41(91.1%) were diagnosed as normal and 4 were diagnosed as MCI. Our findings have implication for research and policy in our region and probably the Low- and Middle-income countries in that the world is greying and there will be substantial increase in older adults by the middle of this century, with that increase in the number of people living with dementia including the oldest old. Secondly it is important to delineate risk factors dementia in the oldest old and thirdly to determine factors that promote cognitive resilience. An easy to implement policy is treatment of blood pressure to prevent dementia, stroke, and other cardiovascular related disorders; however inadequate health coverage is a major issue in SSA due to lack of political will and poor funding. Strength and limitations This is a follow up study of a well-planned longitudinal study which makes important contributions to our understanding of the progression of cognitive and functional abilities in the oldest old in Africa. Although many of our participants had died or were lost to follow up; among those we were able to recontact 135 of the 136 agreed to re-evaluation. We believe that this willingness to participate was motivated by participants and family seeing us as health care providers; as many of them have no regular health care programs. We attended to their immediate health needs and referred to appropriate health care facility when necessary. There are some limitations in this report: one of which is the small sample size, potential selection bias due to loss of subjects who had reached the age of 90 years or older over the course of the study but died before being interviewed or were alive but untraceable. From various waves we have last diagnosis in 45 of 135 participants, even though they were clear of cognitive impairment, the small number did not shed much light on possible incidence outcome. Also given the long interval between recontact, we do not have sufficient information about events or subject status over time. ApoE genotypes were only available for 60% of the sample. We did not adjust for multiple comparisons in Table 4 and that raises the possibility of a type1 error. Finally, this follow-up study did not include data from African Americans in Indianapolis and that would have given the study more novelty and impact. Conclusion This is a longitudinal community-based study that investigated the relationship of present diagnosis of Cognitive Impairment (dementia and MCI) with past demographics, lifestyle, genetics neuropsychological and clinical variables. We found evidence of an association between present diagnosis of cognitive impairment with past cognitive performance, lower diastolic blood pressure as well as use of alcohol. Future studies on dementia in the SSA should incorporate use of biomarkers, neuroimaging and brain autopsy, all of which will improve diagnosis.