Independent, but not synergistic, associations of APOE ε4 and systemic inflammation on cognitive decline: findings from the Women’s Health Initiative

Introduction: Understanding the risk factors that associate with early cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is important to identify high-risk individuals and initiate early intervention. Existing studies show that APOEε4, systemic inflammation, and diabetes may play roles in cognitive decline, but the extent to which these factors interact with each other remains unclear. Our objective was to examine the main effects and higher-order interactions between APOEε4, high sensitivity-C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) as a measure of systemic inflammation, and diabetes on domain-specific measures of cognitive function in two ancillary studies of post-menopausal women from the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI). Method: We identified 2979 cognitively unimpaired women from the WHI Epidemiology of Cognitive Health Outcomes and the WHI Memory Study of Younger Women with cognitive follow-up of up to 13 years. Linear mixed-effects models examined the main and interactive effects of APOEε4, hs-CRP, and diabetes on longitudinal changes in the personal communication for Cognitive Status-modified Test (TICS-m), East Boston Memory Test (immediate and delayed; EBMT), Oral Trail Making Test (OTMT), Verbal Fluency Test (VF-A), Digit Span Test Backwards (DST-backward), and the California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT). All models were adjusted for baseline age, education, body mass index, the WHI randomization arm, and the cohort. Results: APOEε4 carriers had steeper cognitive decline in TICS-m, EBMT (immediate and delayed), VF-A, and CVLT scores relative to non-carriers. Higher levels of hs-CRP were associated with steeper cognitive decline in the DST-backwards scores. There was no association of diabetes or any evidence of interactive effects on cognitive decline in our study. Conclusions: In this large longitudinal study of post-menopausal women, our findings support the hypothesis that genetic risk and systemic inflammation independently influence cognitive decline, but there was no evidence of synergistic effects in postmenopausal women. Further research is needed to elucidate the mechanistic pathways underlying these associations with cognitive decline.

Introduction Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common cause of cognitive impairment and dementia in adults over the age of 65 ( Atri, 2019 ). Many studies have shown that cognitive decline precedes a clinical diagnosis of AD by many years ( Chen et al., 2001 , Elias et al., 2000 , Rajan et al., 2015 , Small et al., 2000 , Zahodne et al., 2013 ). Apolipoprotein E ε4 ( APOE ε4), systemic inflammation, and metabolic dysfunction, particularly in the context of type 2 diabetes mellitus, are consistently implicated risk factors for cognitive decline and AD in later life. These three factors represent distinct but converging pathways, genetic susceptibility, inflammation, and diabetes-related metabolic dysregulation, that intersect in midlife, a crucial period when the cumulative impact of these risks may set the stage for later-life dementia ( Livingston et al., 2024 ). Understanding the synergy of these risk factors on cognitive decline is key for risk stratification and for guiding early prevention strategies. The APOE ε4 allele is the strongest common genetic risk factor for late-onset AD ( Bu, 2009 ) and is associated with increased amyloid and tau pathology, synaptic dysfunction, and neurodegeneration ( Coughlan et al., 2025 , Hohman et al., 2018 , Sampedro et al., 2015 ). Of several biomarkers reflecting systemic inflammation, elevated levels of high sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) has been linked to poorer cognitive outcomes, although findings have varied across studies ( Noss et al., 2022 , Walker et al., 2019 , West et al., 2020 ). Emerging evidence suggests that inflammation may act synergistically with APOE ε4 to exacerbate dementia risk. This interaction may amplify neuroinflammation cascades that compromise blood-brain barrier integrity, accelerate tau pathology, and impair neuronal function ( Tao et al., 2018 ). Metabolic health also plays a central role in brain aging. Diabetes mellitus and chronic hyperglycemia have been associated with an elevated risk of dementia ( Gannon et al., 2022 , Yaffe et al., 2004 ). In midlife and beyond, shifts in metabolic regulation, particularly in the postmenopausal period, may further elevate dementia risk ( Lambrinoudaki et al., 2022 ), underscoring the importance of understanding how these factors contribute to cognitive aging. Importantly, these three risk factors, APOE ε4, systemic inflammation, and diabetes, may not operate in isolation. APOE ε4 carriers appear more vulnerable to inflammatory and metabolic insults, with evidence that neuroinflammatory cascades may be amplified in the context of APOE ε4 ( Tao et al., 2018 ), while diabetes contributes to both systemic inflammation and impaired lipid transport ( Poznyak et al., 2020 ), processes that intersect with APOE -related pathways ( Yang et al., 2023 ). This raises the possibility that combinations of these risk factors act synergistically to accelerate cognitive decline. Accordingly, we aimed in this study to examine not only main effects but also higher-order interactions of these risk factors on longitudinal cognitive decline. To address this, we examined longitudinal data from two harmonized ancillary studies of the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI): WHI Epidemiology of Cognitive Health Outcomes (WHIMS ECHO) and WHI Memory Study of Younger Women (WHIMS-Y, Vaughan et al., 2013 ). In the present analysis, we focused on 2979 clinically unimpaired postmenopausal women from WHIMS ECHO and WHIMS-Y with up to 12.9 years of cognitive follow-up (WHIMS ECHO: Mean = 6.52 years, SD = 3.67; Max = 12.9; WHIMS-Y: Mean = 4.03 years, SD = 1.23; Max = 5.59 in WHIMS-Y). Our objective was to characterize the independent and interactive associations of APOE ε4 status, hs-CRP, and diabetes with domain-specific cognitive trajectories. We hypothesized that higher-order interactions among these factors would emerge, offering new insights into how genetic, inflammatory, and metabolic pathways converge to shape cognitive decline trajectories from midlife into older age. Given the design of the WHI study, we also explored any additional associations with hormone therapy. Methods Participants We identified 2573 women from WHIMS ECHO and 406 women from WHIMS-Y with demographic and laboratory data available for APOE ε4 status, plasma hs-CRP, serum-measured fasting blood glucose, and self-reported diabetes history at the time of HT randomization in the WHI. Supplementary Figure S1 depicts flowcharts identifying how we narrowed down to participants included in our study. All participants were clinically unimpaired at enrollment based on WHIMS adjudication protocols ( Shumaker et al., 1998 ). To determine cognitive status, a central consensus panel of experts reviewed all annually collected test and supplemental data and classified participants as cognitively unimpaired, Mild Cognitive Impairment, probable dementia, or unable to classify using standardized diagnostic criteria ( Gaussoin et al., 2019 ). All WHIMS ECHO and WHIMS-Y participants were originally enrolled in the WHI hormone therapy (HT) trials, a randomized, double-blind comparison between two conjugated equine estrogens regimens and matching placebos among 27,347 post-menopausal women (“ Design of the Women’s Health Initiative Clinical Trial and Observational Study,” 1998 ). The WHIMS ECHO ancillary study recruited cognitively unimpaired women from the WHIMS ancillary study of the WHI HT trial who were 65–79 years old at the time of HT randomization ( Shumaker et al., 1998 ), while WHIMS-Y women were 50–54 years old at the time of HT randomization in WHI ( Vaughan et al., 2013 ). In WHIMS ECHO, telephone cognitive testing began on average 11.96 (0.83) years after HT randomization and followed participants up to 12.9 years. In WHIMS-Y, cognitive testing began on average 14.3 (1.08) years after HT randomization and followed participants up to 5.59 years ( Table 1 ). Cognitive testing initiation and follow up is shown in Supplementary Figure S2 . Except for age, all enrollment criteria for WHIMS ECHO and WHIMS-Y were the same, including being currently active in WHI follow-up, provided informed consent to undergo annual telephone-based assessments of cognitive function, allowed a friend or family member to be contacted, and had to have hearing acuity adequate for a personal communication ( Espeland et al., 2017 ). All participants provided written informed consent, and all protocols were approved by local Institutional Review Boards. Neuropsychological testing Participants underwent a cognitive personal communication for tracking changes in cognitive status ( Rapp et al., 2012 ). The validated tests used in the current study are described in detail below. All tele-interview assessment procedures were identical in WHIMS ECHO and in WHIMS-Y. The personal communication for Cognitive Status-modified (TICS-m; Welsh et al., 1993 ) test is a widely used measure of global cognitive functioning. The TICS-m is a 16-question test with scores ranging from 0 to 50, where a higher score reflects better performance. The word recall section of the TICS-m is additionally recalled again after a 5-minute delay (TICS-m delayed) and scores range from 0 to 10, with a higher score also reflecting better performance. The East Boston Memory Test (EBMT; Albert et al., 1991 ) is a measure of episodic verbal memory where participants are asked to recall as many elements as possible of a short paragraph story immediately after hearing it (EBMT-immediate) and after a 15-minute delay (EBMT-delayed). A higher score reflects better performance on both the immediate and delayed portions. The Oral Trail Making Test (OTMT; Ricker &amp; Axelrod, 1994 ) is a modified version of the original Trail Making test and is a widely used and well-validated measure of attention (Part A) and executive functioning (Part B). We calculated the difference in the time (seconds) to complete each task (Time B – Time A) with a higher score reflecting worse executive function performance. The Verbal Fluency-Animals (VF-A; Benton, 1968 ) test measures verbal fluency and requires participants to spontaneously name as many animals as possible in one minute. The final score is the number of unique animals named, with a higher score reflecting better performance. The Digit Span Test Backwards (DST-backwards; Wechsler, 1981 ) measures working memory and requires participants to repeat sequentially series of single-digit numbers of increasing length orally, presented in backwards order. A higher score indicates better performance. The California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT) measures verbal learning and verbal memory. The modified CVLT used in WHIMS ECHO and WHIMS-Y consists of three learning trials of the same 16-word list were administered. The sum of all words recalled was recorded with a higher score reflecting better performance. Average baseline test scores are reported in Supplementary Table S1 . Our study includes domain-specific measures of cognitive function, including, global cognition, episodic memory, attention, executive function, verbal fluency, and working memory. APOE genotypes APOE genotypes were based on SNPs rs429358 and rs7412. Genetic data were imputed and harmonized across WHI genome-wide association studies. Imputation used the 1000 Genomes Project reference panel and MaCH algorithms implemented in Minimac ( Howie et al., 2012 ). Both SNPs had high imputation quality ( R 2 &gt; .95 for rs429358 and R 2 &gt; .88 for rs7412). Genotypes ε2/ε2, ε2/ε3, and ε3/ε3 were classified as ε4− while genotypes ε2/ε4, ε3/ε4, ε4/ε4 were classified as ε4+. Inflammatory markers Baseline hs-CRP was measured in plasma at the University of Minnesota Medical Center (UMMC) using a latex-particle enhanced immunoturbidimetric assay kit (Roch Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN 46,250) and read on the Roche Modular P Chemistry analyzer (Roche Diagnostics). Intraassay coefficient of variation was 2.27%. Diabetes Baseline fasting blood glucose was measured at UMMC. Glucose is measured in serum using the Gluco-quant Glucose/hexokinase reagent (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN 46,250) on the Roche Modular P Chemistry analyzer (Roche Diagnostics Corporation). In this enzymatic method, hexokinase catalyzes the phosphorylation of glucose to glucose-6-phosphate, which is oxidized to gluconate-6-phosphate in the presence of NADP. The rate of NADPH formation is measured photometrically. The method has been standardized against the isotope dilution mass spectrometry reference method. To control for potential drift over time, the instrument is routinely calibrated using NIST Standard Reference Material 965a. Intraassay coefficient of variation was 1.55%. Diabetes status and medication use were collected at screening by self-report but is a validated measure used in prior WHI publications ( Bonds et al., 2006 , Margolis et al., 2004 , 2008 ). Participants who answered the question “Did a doctor ever say that you had sugar diabetes or high blood sugar when you were not pregnant?” with “Yes” and were treated with oral hypoglycemic agents or insulin were classified as diabetic. Women with a fasting blood glucose &gt; 125 mg/dL were also categorized as having diabetes. Of note, the classification of diabetes status in this study, based on a single fasting glucose measurement, does not conform to established diagnostic guidelines, which require confirmatory testing and may include additional criteria such as HbA1c or oral glucose tolerance tests. Therefore, associations with fasting glucose and self-reported diabetes should be interpreted with caution. Statistical analyses A series of linear mixed-effects models were used to examine the main and interactive effects of APOE ε4 carriage, hs-CRP, and diabetes on longitudinal cognition changes. The hypothesized relationship of the three exposures of interest ( APOE ε4, hs-CRP, and diabetes) and cognition is illustrated using a directed acyclic graph in Supplementary Figure S3 . The following models were run for each cognitive test: Cognition ~ APOE ε4 × time Cognition ~ hs-CRP × time Cognition ~ Diabetes × time Cognition ~ APOE ε4 × hs-CRP × time Cognition ~ APOE ε4 × Diabetes × time Cognition ~ hs-CRP × Diabetes × time Cognition ~ APOE ε4 × hs-CRP × Diabetes time All models including interaction terms included the lower-order terms in the interaction as well. All models were run with covariates including baseline age, education level, body mass index, WHI randomization arm (control vs intervention), and cohort (WHIMS ECHO vs WHIMS-Y) over time. Models 2, 3, and 6 additionally adjusted for APOE ε4 status, models 1, 2, and 4 additionally adjusted for diabetes, and models 3 and 5 additionally adjusted for baseline hs-CRP. All models included random intercepts and slopes. All data were z-scored, hs-CRP data and OTMT scores were log transformed, and TICS-m delayed scores were square root transformed. To account for multiple comparisons, p-values from all analyses were adjusted using the false discovery rate (FDR) method, with significance set a priori at FDR corrected p &lt; 0.05. A sensitivity analysis was run to determine if any associations were modified by age, given that we were examining younger and older participants from the WHI: Cognition ~ Predictor of Interest × Baseline Age × Time Where the predictor of interest could be APOE ε4, hs-CRP, diabetes, or their interactions. Lower-order interaction terms were also included in the model. As an exploratory analysis, rather than adjusting for WHI randomization arm as control vs intervention, we also ran an analysis adjusting for randomization arm differentiating by the type of intervention and control group, including estrogen only intervention, estrogen only control, estrogen plus progestin intervention, and estrogen plus progestin control. Another exploratory analysis was run, additionally adjusting our models for race (White vs not White) and Ethnicity (Hispanic or Latino vs Not Hispanic or Latino). Results Participant demographics Participant demographics for our sample of 2979 women are reported in Table 1 . As expected, WHIMS-Y participants were younger at HT randomization and ancillary study baseline (on average 15 years younger at each). While 24% of the overall sample were APOE ε4 carriers, WHIMS-Y had a significantly greater proportion of APOE ε4 carriers, possibly due to ethnoracial diversity in WHIMS-Y, who had significantly more Hispanic or Black participants compared to WHIMS ECHO ( Crean et al., 2010 , Y.-Y. Wang et al., 2021 , Weiss et al., 2021 ). WHIMS-Y participants also had a significantly higher BMI, a significantly smaller proportion of women were hypertensive, and a significantly smaller proportion had cardiovascular risk. WHIMS-Y also had a significantly greater percentage of current smokers. There were no significant differences in education or diabetes at the baseline between the cohorts. Main associations of APOEε4 status, inflammation, and diabetes risk with cognition Table 2 reports the significant model estimates, while Supplementary Table S2 reports all model estimates, regardless of significance. APOE ε4 carriers exhibited steeper cognitive decline than non-carriers on several cognitive tests: TICS-m, EBMT-immediate, EBMT-delayed, VF–A, and CVLT (Model 1; Figure 1(A – E) ). Women with higher levels of hs-CRP exhibited steeper cognitive decline on DST-backwards scores relative to women with lower levels of hs-CRP (Model 2; Figure 1F ). There was no significant main association between diabetes and cognitive change (Model 3). Interactive associations of APOEε4 status, inflammation, and diabetes risk with cognition There were no interactive associations of APOE ε4 status and inflammation (Model 4), APOE ε4 status and diabetes (Model 5), inflammation and diabetes (Model 6), or through the three-way interaction ( APOE ε4 status, inflammation, and diabetes; Model 7) on cognitive change in women. Sensitivity analyses We did not find evidence of an interaction with baseline age in any of our models (Model 8; Supplementary Table S3 ). All findings remained consistent whether we adjusted for WHI randomization arm as control vs intervention or if we specified by the type of hormone intervention and control group (estrogen control, estrogen intervention, estrogen plus progestin control, and estrogen plus progestin intervention; Supplementary Table S4 ). All findings also remained consistent when we adjusted our models for race and ethnicity ( Supplementary Table S5 ). Discussion In this large longitudinal study of postmenopausal women followed over 6.1 (3.5) years on average, we found that APOE ε4 carriers and elevated hs-CRP were independently associated with cognitive decline. Consistent with a other studies ( Caselli et al., 2009 , Polsinelli et al., 2023 , Rawle et al., 2018 , Reas et al., 2019 ), APOE ε4 carriership predicted decline across a broad cognitive profile, including episodic verbal memory, verbal fluency, and global cognition. We found that APOE ε4 carriers consistently exhibited greater decline in measures of both short- and long-term verbal memory (EBMT-immediate, EBMT-delayed, VF-A, CVLT). This finding is consistent with prior work that APOE ε4 carriers experience increased rates of verbal episodic memory decline ( Albrecht et al., 2015 , Schiepers et al., 2012 ) relative to non-carriers. Prior work has also shown that female APOE ε4 carries exhibit steeper episodic memory decline relative to males, but this research has been mostly conducted in individuals with mild cognitive impairment ( Sohn et al., 2018 , X. Wang et al., 2019 ). While we were unable to address sex differences given our exclusively female cohort, our results highlight the importance of APOE ε4 status as modifiers of risk for cognitive decline in women. We also found that APOE ε4 carriers showed greater decline in global cognition (TICS-m), similar to findings from a meta-analysis where APOE ε4 carriers without dementia displayed significantly faster cognitive decline relative to non-carriers ( Makkar et al., 2020 ). Taken together, our findings reinforce APOE ε4 as a robust driver of cognitive decline and extend this evidence to a uniquely postmenopausal cohort and reflect the importance of APOE ε4 particularly on systems that support episodic memory function. By contrast, systemic inflammation was associated with a much narrower cognitive profile. Women with higher systemic inflammation showed cognitive decline only on DST-backward, a test of working memory and executive function. The literature is somewhat inconsistent regarding the association between hs-CRP and cognitive decline. Some studies report no association of hs-CRP with cognition ( Long et al., 2023 ), while others report that higher hs-CRP is associated with lower cognition ( Y. Wang et al., 2023 ). Another study reported that higher hs-CRP was associated with less cognitive decline in those who already have cognitive impairment ( Zhang et al., 2023 ). Our results support findings that higher hs-CRP is associated with decline in executive function ( Tegeler et al., 2016 , Y. Wang et al., 2023 ) and suggest that systemic inflammation, as measured by hs-CRP, may selectively be associated with executive aspects of cognition, particularly working memory, rather than broad associations across cognitive domains. We did not find any associations between diabetes and cognitive change in our study. Prior WHI studies have found that type 2 diabetes mellitus is associated with cognitive decline across multiple domains ( Espeland et al., 2011 , 2012 ). However, these studies focused on different subsets of women from the WHI and only included women older than 65 years. Our study includes younger women with a lower magnitude of cognitive decline, where associations with diabetes may be less pronounced or not be detectable. Interestingly, we also did not find any interactions between these risk factors, despite a large cohort of women followed over many years. Some patterns were found between risk factors, but none were significant after correcting for multiple comparisons. The absence of synergistic, high-order interactions in our large sample may suggest that while APOE ε4 and hs-CRP independently contribute to decline in specific domains of cognition in postmenopausal women, their associations may operate through distinct and non-overlapping pathways and along targeted cognitive profiles. However, despite our large sample size, it is possible we do not have enough power to run three- or four-way interactions, therefore these analyses require replication. There is notably a tension between larger sample sizes to examine smaller effect sizes and more complex higher-order interaction versus the ability to observe much larger, and arguably more meaningful, effects that are clearly apparent even in smaller sample sizes. Given our very consistent and repeated effects of APOE ε4 on cognitive decline in this sample, we feel confident in the robustness of this association. By contrast, the absence of significant interactions, even in a large sample, suggests that if such effects exist, they are likely to be of smaller magnitude and potentially of limited clinical relevance. Our longitudinal study is strengthened by a large well-characterized sample of post-menopausal women followed an average of six years, with some follow up extending up to twelve years. Additional strengths include the harmonized cognitive assessments in both WHIMS ECHO and WHIMS-Y, which enabled consistent measurement across midlife and older-age cohorts, and that well-validated, domain-specific neuropsychological tests were used. The availability of genetic ( APOE ε4), inflammatory (hs-CRP), and metabolic (diabetes history and fasting glucose) data in the same sample also allowed for a multidimensional assessment of risk factors and their potential interactions over time. However, there are several limitations. Our cohort of participants selected from the WHI was predominately non-Hispanic white and may limit generalizability of our results. Our sample also only included women and limits generalizability by gender. Additionally, our measure for carbohydrate intolerance was limited to a single fasting glucose measurement. Despite our large sample size, it is possible we do not have enough power to detect signal while running complex four-way interactions ( APOE ε4 × hs-CRP × Diabetes × time). Therefore, these higher-order interaction analyses should be considered exploratory and should be further investigated in even larger samples. Finally, while we accounted for WHI HT arm (control vs intervention) in our analyses, hormone therapy intervention and type (i.e., estrogen vs estrogen plus progestin) were not a large focus of our study. Future analyses should explore the interplay of HT with APOE ε4, hs-CRP, and diabetes on cognitive decline. In conclusion, the findings from the present study support the hypothesis that genetic risk and systemic inflammation were associated with cognitive decline among postmenopausal women. More insight into these mechanisms could pave the way for targeted preventive interventions aimed at mitigating cognitive decline, particularly in the high-risk female population. Short list of WHI Investigators Program Office: (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, Maryland) Jacques Rossouw, Jared Reis, and Candice Price. Clinical Coordinating Center: (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA) Garnet Anderson, Ross Prentice, Andrea LaCroix, and Charles Kooperberg. Steering Committee and Academic Centers: (University of Alabama at Birmingham) Gretchen Wells; (Albert Einstein College of Medicine) Yasmin Mossavar-Rahmani; (University at Buffalo) Amy Millen; (University at Buffalo) Jean Wactawski-Wende; (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center) Marian Neuhouser; (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center) Holly Harris; (University of Massachusetts) Brian Silver; (University of North Carolina) Nora Franceschini; (Stanford Prevention Research Center) Marcia L. Stefanick; (The Ohio State University) Electra Paskett; (Wake Forest University) Mara Vitolins. For a list of all the investigators who have contributed to WHI science, please visit : https://www.whi.org/doc/WHI-Investigator-Long-List.pdf . Supplementary Material Supplementary Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/13803395.2025.2608340