Human brain small extracellular vesicles contain selectively packaged, full-length mRNA

SUMMARY Brain cells release and take up small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) containing bioactive nucleic acids. sEV exchange is hypothesized to contribute to stereotyped spread of neuropathological changes in the diseased brain. We assess mRNA from sEVs of postmortem brain from non-diseased (ND) individuals and those with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) using short- and long-read sequencing. sEV transcriptomes are distinct from those of bulk tissue, showing enrichment for genes including mRNAs encoding ribosomal proteins and transposable elements such as human-specific LINE-1 (L1Hs). AD versus ND sEVs show enrichment of inflammation-related mRNAs and depletion of synaptic signaling mRNAs. sEV mRNAs from cultured murine primary neurons, astrocytes, or microglia show similarities to human brain sEVs and reveal cell-type-specific packaging. Approximately 80% of neural sEV transcripts sequenced using long-read sequencing are full length. Motif analyses of sEV-enriched isoforms elucidate RNA-binding proteins that may be associated with sEV loading. Collectively, we show that mRNA in brain sEVs is intact, selectively packaged, and altered in disease.

INTRODUCTION Cells release small extracellular vesicles (sEVs), including exosomes, which are ~30–150 nm in diameter and produced via the endocytic pathway. 1 sEVs can be taken up by and induce functional changes within recipient cells. 2 Bioactive molecules in sEVs include proteins, lipids, metabolites, and multiple forms of RNA, including microRNA (miRNA), long non-coding RNA, and mRNA. 1 In the brain, sEVs play diverse roles and are released upon stimulation of neural cells, such as by neuronal depolarization or local increases in extracellular ATP in microglia and astrocytes. 3 – 7 Brain sEVs have garnered particular interest in the field of neurodegeneration as potential conduits for intercellular transmission of misfolded proteins 8 ; however, sEV mRNA cargoes in diseased human brain have not been thoroughly explored. While early reports have suggested that the majority of sEV mRNAs are fragmented, 9 , 10 recent data demonstrated that at least some can be full length 11 , 12 and translatable in recipient cells. 13 – 15 Notably, intact mRNA encoding the ARC (activity-regulated cytoskeletal) protein, a regulator of synaptic plasticity evolved from retrotransposons, is packaged and transmitted in virus-like capsids that self-assemble from ARC proteins. 15 – 17 Capsid formation was later observed in another retrotransposon-derived endogenous protein, PEG10. 18 PEG10 mRNA contains untranslated region (UTR) sequences that direct it into capsids and can be used to pseudotype other mRNAs for encapsidation. 18 The transmission of ARC and PEG10 mRNA suggests that other full-length and functional mRNAs, including those with endogenous virus-like properties, might be transmitted by or with brain sEVs. Here, we report characterization of sEV mRNA transcriptomes from human postmortem prefrontal cortex of individuals who were neurologically non-diseased (ND) and those with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) complemented by cell-type-specific sEV assessments derived from homogeneous mouse primary cultures. Motif analysis of sEV-enriched full-length mRNAs further identified RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) potentially involved in brain sEV packaging. Together, our data reveal an expansive landscape of diverse, selectively packaged, and intact mRNAs from brain sEVs that are altered in AD. RESULTS Transcriptome of human brain sEVs is enriched in translation mRNAs and is altered in AD sEVs were isolated from prefrontal cortex of 12 ND and 12 AD postmortem human brains using differential centrifugation and sucrose density gradients according to published protocols 19 with minor modifications ( Figure S1 ; Table S1 ). Brain-derived sEVs were characterized via western blot, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and nanoparticle tracking analysis according to the standards of the “minimal information for the study of extracellular vesicles (MISEV)” ( Figure S1 ). 20 Importantly, sEVs were treated with RNase to eliminate extravesicular RNA, after which intravesicular RNA was extracted from vesicle preparations and corresponding sections of bulk brain tissue blocks. Sequencing libraries were constructed using poly-adenylated (poly(A)) selection to enrich for mRNA and profiled with Illumina next-generation sequencing (NGS). Transcript abundance was quantified with Salmon, and differential expression analysis was performed in R with DESeq2. 21 , 22 Principal-component analysis (PCA) determined that sample type (sEVs versus bulk) accounted for nearly 70% of the variation in the top 500 differentially expressed genes identified in short-read sequencing, supporting selective packaging of sEV mRNAs ( Figure 1A ). Approximately 1,400 genes were upregulated in sEVs over bulk and around 8,000 were downregulated with p-adj &lt; 0.01 ( Figure S2 ). Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of significantly differentially expressed genes conducted using Metascape 23 revealed that sEVs were enriched in genes relating to translation, oxidative phosphorylation, and mRNA splicing ( Figure 1B ). Included in the GO term “translation” were 77 of the 80 known ribosomal protein-encoding genes (RPGs) ( Figure S2 ). 24 The 500 highest expressed genes in sEVs involved cellular responses to stress, pathways associated with neurodegeneration, and vesicle-mediated transport ( Figure 1C ). DESeq2 was next used to compare the effect of disease state on the sEV transcriptome, identifying 700 genes upregulated in AD sEVs relative to ND sEVs and nearly 1,500 that were downregulated with p-adj &lt; 0.05 ( Figure 1D ). GO analysis suggested that upregulated genes relate to inflammation and immune activation, reflecting well-established patterns of neuroinflammation associated with neurodegeneration ( Figure 1E ). Meanwhile, downregulated genes were associated with synaptic signaling and maintenance of membrane potential through the establishment of ion gradients ( Figure 1F ). We next assessed sEV expression levels of genes associated with AD through genome-wide association studies (GWASs). 25 Nearly all GWAS-associated genes were detected in sEVs, with the most abundant being clusterin, a secreted chaperone that inhibits aggregation of other proteins, including amyloid fibrils ( Figure 1G ). Other abundant transcripts included MS4A4A and MS4A6A, genes predominantly expressed in microglia that may promote productive or destructive neuroinflammation depending on the presence of several well-established variants that modulate AD risk ( Figure 1G ). 26 Both MS4 genes were significantly enriched in sEVs over bulk brain tissue and showed trends of enrichment in AD over ND sEVs ( Figure 1H ). Significantly altered transcript expression in AD sEVs included increased expression of USP6NL, which encodes a protein regulating endolysosomal trafficking ( Figure 1H ). Together, these changes in AD-relevant gene expression in sEVs illustrate an inflammatory signature that may serve as a window into disease processes occurring in the AD brain. Select transposable element (TE) transcripts are enriched in sEVs AD and other neurodegenerative diseases have been linked to changes in expression of TEs. 27 Many TEs are also poly(A) and so were isolated and sequenced along with targeted cellular mRNAs. We profiled our NGS data with SalmonTE, a tool that maps reads to a reference transcriptome of TEs. 28 PCA showed significant variation driven by TE packaging in sEVs as compared to bulk brain tissue but little differentiation between AD and ND samples ( Figure 2A ). The percentage of total reads mapping to TEs was similar in both bulk and sEV samples at 2.54% and 2.91%, respectively ( Figure 2B ). The majority of TEs were downregulated in sEVs relative to bulk. However, a subset of TEs spanning several clades of retrotransposons were highly enriched in sEVs ( Figures 2C and 2D ). L1Hs was among the most significantly differentially expressed TEs ( Figure 2E ). L1Hs is a human-specific long interspersed nuclear element 1 (LINE1) that is evolutionarily the youngest LINE1 in the human genome and the only one that is thought to still generate retrotransposition-competent copies. 29 Reads mapping to L1Hs accounted for nearly 80% of the total assigned TE reads in sEVs compared to ~35% in bulk. The dramatic enrichment of L1Hs in sEVs suggests a strong propensity for packaging within sEVs and highlights the possibility of a subset of sEVs acting as virus-like particles, transmitting transcripts with retroviral ancestry. Consistent with this view, ARC and PEG10 mRNAs were also detected in our preparations ( Figure S3 ). sEVs from murine primary neural cell cultures share enriched transcripts with human brain sEVs sEVs prepared from human postmortem tissue are inherently of mixed cellular origin, precluding the definitive determination of cell type of origin for individual transcripts in our human brain sEVs. We therefore sought to characterize the transcriptome of sEVs from distinct brain cell types grown in homogeneous murine primary cell cultures. Neurons, astrocytes, or microglia were isolated from embryonic or neonatal mouse brains using antibody-labeled magnetic beads for positive or negative selection based on cell-type-specific surface markers, and purity was confirmed by immunofluorescence and quantified ( Figure S4 ). sEVs were then collected from each cell type, and each sEV preparation was validated per MISEV guidelines ( Figure S4 ). 20 Short-read libraries were produced from poly(A)-selected mRNA from sEVs and cell pellets, and differential expression analysis was conducted. RT-qPCR of 6 genes was used to validate differences in expression across sample type (sEVs versus cells) ( Figure S5 ). Expression levels of sEV transcripts were compared to their cells of origin and across cell types ( Figure 3A ). PCA showed that microglia samples clustered separately from astrocyte and neuron samples, potentially reflecting the distinct developmental origin of microglia compared to astrocytes and neurons ( Figure 3B ). Interestingly, the next largest principal component in our sEV dataset indicated that for neurons and astrocytes, sample type (sEVs versus cells) contributes more variance than cell type (neurons versus astrocytes) ( Figure 3B ). Neurons and astrocytes may therefore use similar processes to package mRNAs as sEV cargoes. sEV-enriched transcripts from primary astrocytes, neurons, and microglia were compared to those enriched in human brain sEVs relative to bulk tissue ( Figure 3C ). The sequencing depth achieved in primary cells was approximately double that attained in human samples (~50 million reads per sample in murine samples versus ~25 million reads in human samples), though this did not correlate with the number of significantly enriched transcripts in each group ( Figure 3C ). Nearly 46% of human brain sEV-enriched genes conserved in mice were also enriched in sEVs of one or more primary cell types ( Figure 3C ). A core group of 170 transcripts related to translation, mRNA splicing, and oxidative phosphorylation were enriched in all sEV samples profiled ( Figure 3D ). Overall, the sEV-enriched mRNAs showed remarkable consistency across species, developmental stage, sEV preparation method, and cell type, suggesting a conserved mechanism of selective mRNA packaging in brain sEVs. sEVs from murine primary neural cell cultures demonstrate cell-type-specific packaging of mRNA Differential expression analysis was next used to identify differences in mRNA packaging in sEVs across cell type. Compared to astrocyte sEVs, neuronal sEVs contained high levels of transcripts relating to translation and oxidative phosphorylation, perhaps reflecting particularly high energetic demands in neurons ( Figure 3E ). Neuronal sEVs were enriched in mRNAs involved in synaptic signaling, regulation of membrane potential, and neuron projection morphogenesis relative to both astrocyte and microglial sEVs ( Figures 3E and 3F ). These molecules could play a role in axon guidance during development but are also expressed in the adult brain and were detected in human-brain-derived sEVs. Compared to neuronal sEVs, astrocyte sEVs were enriched in transcripts pertaining to cellular responses such as adaptive-immune signaling through the interleukin-1 pathway and response to interferons ( Figure 3G ). Relative to microglia sEVs, astrocyte sEVs were enriched in transcripts linked to neuron projection development, such as ephrins and Eph receptors, fibroblast growth factors and receptors, Wnt signaling molecules, and frizzled receptors ( Figure 3H ). These signaling molecules could impact neurite development upon uptake by neurons, adding to the numerous forms of crosstalk and communication documented between astrocytes and neurons. 30 , 31 Microglial sEV mRNA was compared to that of neuronal and astrocyte sEVs, with nearly identical trends identified by GO analysis. Enriched mRNAs in microglial sEVs were associated with cytokine production, regulation of defense response, and the adaptive immune system ( Figures 3I and 3J ). Microglial sEVs were also enriched in interferon gamma and beta response transcripts, including many chemokine ligands and receptors. We then examined expression of key AD-relevant transcripts across sEVs from each cell type. Apoe transcripts were highly abundant in all sEVs but especially those from microglia, which also expressed high levels of transcripts from the MS4 gene cluster ( Figure 3K ). Expression levels of other transcripts of interest also varied by cell type, underscoring the unique potential of each cell type to contribute to disease through mRNA transported by sEVs ( Figure 3K ). Transcripts enriched in sEVs over primary cells included Usp6nl and Mindy2 , which encodes a deubiquitinase that is thought to regulate protein turnover ( Figure 3L ). These data implicate brain sEV mRNA processes that could become dysregulated in brain disease. Neural sEVs contain full-length mRNA isoforms Short-read sequencing cannot easily capture full-length mRNA sequences nor their isoform diversity. We therefore utilized long-read sequencing (PacBio; Sequel II) on human brain sEV mRNAs. We used SQANTI3 32 to annotate isoform categories ( Figure 4A ) and isoSeQL (C.S.L. and J.C., unpublished data) to compare isoforms across samples. The majority of transcripts were full length in both bulk and sEVs (“full splice match”), with next most prevalent isoform categories being isoforms with a novel combination of previously annotated splice junctions (“novel in catalog”), truncated transcripts (“incomplete splice match”), and isoforms with at least one unannotated junction with a novel splice site (“novel not in catalog”) ( Figure 4B ). Antisense, genic, intergenic, and fusion transcripts were rare in all samples ( Figure 4B ). We identified 19,444 full-length isoforms in sEVs corresponding to 10,755 different genes, with 78.5% of sEV transcripts sequenced identified as full-length isoforms in the reference transcriptome, which is slightly but significantly higher than the 76.5% in bulk samples ( p = 0.008; Figure 4C ). Only 4.6% of sEV transcripts were truncated transcripts, a number that was significantly lower than the 6.9% of incomplete transcripts observed in bulk samples ( p = 1 × 10 −13 ; Figure 4D ). The surprisingly high fraction of full-length transcripts observed in sEVs is in striking contrast to published descriptions of largely fragmented sEV transcriptomes 9 and highlights the potential for previously unappreciated roles for sEV full-length mRNAs. Both sEVs and bulk tissue contained similar fractions of novel isoforms ( Figure S6 ). These data add to a growing literature documenting unknown isoforms in the brain using long-read sequencing. 33 – 36 Included among the “novel not in catalog” isoforms were those containing intraexonic junctions, predicted to result from somatic gene recombination ( Figure S6 ). 37 We next compared the relative abundance of full-length transcripts in sEVs versus bulk to that observed using short-read sequencing. We found that the fold changes of gene expression in long-read sequencing data were positively correlated with those of the same gene detected via short-read sequencing ( Figure 4E ). This suggests that sEV-enriched transcripts identified using short-read sequencing exist as full-length mRNAs. The comparatively low sequencing depth of long-read sequencing is insufficient to identify sEV-specific packaging of individual isoforms ( Figure S6 ). To corroborate the results of long-read sequencing analysis from human brain bulk tissue and sEVs, long-read libraries were prepared from mouse primary cell and sEV mRNAs. We identified 15,508 full-length isoforms in murine sEVs corresponding to 10,135 different genes. The composition of isoform subtypes from murine cells and sEVs was similar to that of human bulk tissue and sEVs, albeit with lower levels of novel isoforms ( Figures 4F and S7 ). Isoforms from murine sEVs showed high levels of intact transcripts, with averages of 81.7%, 85.8%, and 77.5% full-length transcripts for astrocytes, microglia, and neurons, respectively ( Figure 4G ). Isoforms from the source cells showed even higher integrity, with 89.2, 91.4%, and 85.8% full-length transcripts for astrocytes, microglia, and neurons, respectively ( Figure 4G ). These percentages are notably higher than human brain bulk tissue, likely because live primary cells were flash frozen, in contrast to postmortem tissue that is frozen several hours after death, and suggest that encapsulation in a sEV may protect mRNAs from degradation postmortem. Altogether, our long-read sequencing data contrast with previous reports of mostly fragmented mRNAs within sEVs and implicate myriad roles for full-length mRNAs in brain sEVs. Motif analysis identified consensus sequences in human sEV full-length mRNAs and predicted associated RNA binding proteins Specific miRNA loading into sEVs has implicated conserved binding motifs recognized by RBPs. 38 To identify mRNA sequences shared by sEV-enriched isoforms, we conducted bioinformatic analysis in the MEME Suite 39 on 928 sEV-enriched isoforms. A tool called STREME 40 was used to discover motifs ab initio and identified 42 significantly enriched 8–15 base pair sequences ( Figure 5A ; Table S2 ). The 7 th , 11 th , and 38 th most significantly enriched STREME motifs contain known binding sites for the RBP YBX1, which has moderate expression in human cerebral cortex (Human Protein Atlas) and has been associated with mRNA loading in EVs, supporting use of STREME to identify relevant RBP motifs ( Figure 5B ). 41 – 43 Interestingly, the top STREME motif is a poly(A) stretch that is not associated with 3′ polyadenylation of transcripts, which are clipped during long-read data processing. Another MEME Suite tool, Tomtom, 44 was used to match motifs identified with STREME to putative RBPs by comparing them to a dataset containing 1,194 RNA motifs associated with 160 human RBPs ( Figure 5C ). 44 Tomtom matched STREME motifs to RBPs known to be associated with EV loading of miRNAs including AGO2, HNRNPK, HNRNPH1, and FUS. 38 Among the RBPs associated with the top 10 STREME motifs were HNRNPD and HNRNPH2, members of the family of heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins that bind to pre-mRNAs in the nucleus and influence transcript processing and transport to the cytoplasm that have not previously been shown to participate in EV loading. Several of the other top STREME motifs included homopolymer stretches that may be recognized by RBPs such as poly(C)-binding protein 2 (PCBP2), which was reported in a human brain sEV proteomics dataset generated using mass spectrometry 45 and was weakly detectable by comparatively less-sensitive western blot in our human brain sEVs ( Figure S8 ). We next analyzed our sEV-enriched isoforms using the MEME Suite SEA tool, 46 which searches input data for enrichment of a set of defined motifs. SEA identified 121 known motifs associated with 77 different RBPs that were significantly increased in sEV-enriched isoforms ( Figure 5C ). Among the significant SEA motifs were 7 RBPs with known associations to sEV loading 38 and 7 RBPs that have been detected in published proteomics datasets 19 , 45 of sEVs from human brain tissue ( Figure 5C ). STREME analysis was also conducted on sEV-enriched transcripts from murine primary astrocytes, microglia, and neurons, identifying 5, 3, and 23 enriched motifs, respectively. The differences in the number of motifs identified are likely due to a difference in the total number of enriched transcripts per sample group, which was substantially higher in neurons (676) than astrocytes (276) or microglia (233), mirroring differences in long-read sequencing depth achieved by each of the sample groups ( Figure S7 ). Nevertheless, STREME identified similar motifs to those identified in human brain sEVs, as determined by Tomtom analysis conducted with the human STREME dataset as a reference, with statistically significantly similar ( p &lt; 0.05) human motifs identified for each of the mouse motifs. Among the shared motifs were two PCBP2 motifs corresponding to human motif #15/astrocyte motif #3 and human motif #5/neuron motif #15 ( Figure 5D ; Table S3 ). By cross-referencing motifs and associated RBP hits from STREME, Tomtom, and SEA with protein expression in the prefrontal cortex reported in the Human Protein Atlas and published human brain sEV proteomics datasets, 19 , 45 we identified a short list of RBPs that we hypothesize could contribute to the selective packaging of brain sEV mRNAs ( Table 1 ). DISCUSSION Our data provide an extensive characterization of the human sEV transcriptome from ND and AD brains complemented by mouse primary culture studies that support cell-specific origins of sEV transcripts. Contrasting with previous reports of largely fragmented mRNAs within sEVs, 9 , 10 we identified over 10,000 full-length mRNAs through the use of PacBio long-read sequencing in both human brain and murine primary culture sEVs. Furthermore, the relative abundance of these full-length species mirrored the differential expression observed via short-read sequencing, indicating that sEV-enriched transcripts detected here and previously can be present as full-length mRNAs with the potential to generate functional proteins upon translation, although this was not assessed in the current study. Our findings augment the spectrum of diverse mRNA sEV cargoes released by neural cell types and implicate selective sEV mRNA packaging mechanisms utilized both by the normal brain and during the spread of neurodegenerative disease, paralleling protein-centric disease propagation. 8 , 47 – 50 Bulk versus sEV transcriptomes support selective packaging of sEV mRNAs All neural sEV samples showed common enrichment in genes relating to translation, such as RPGs. Similar observations have previously been made in epidermoid and hepatocellular carcinoma cell line sEVs. 51 We detected full-length isoforms of RPGs and thousands of other transcripts, suggesting that sEV-delivered mRNAs could be translated to support turnover of ribosomal proteins 52 and potentially regulate ribosome function. We speculate that translation-relevant mRNAs transported in sEVs could benefit neural cells, especially neurons that have extensive arbors where cellular function is supported by local translation in varied locations including soma, dendrites, and synaptic terminals. 53 , 54 sEV uptake at these distal regions could serve as an alternative to energy- and time-intensive intracellular transport of mRNA granules from the soma to distant axonal locations by motor proteins. 55 Indeed, localized translation of many of our sEV-enriched transcripts, including RPGs, has been reported at growth cones in the developing brain 56 and in pre- and post-synaptic terminals of mature neurons. 57 – 59 The sEV transcriptome is altered in AD brains The mRNA content of human brain sEVs is altered in patients with AD relative to the neurologically ND, adding to literature demonstrating dysregulation of brain sEV miRNAs in AD. 60 , 61 AD-derived sEVs were depleted in transcripts related to synaptic signaling, consistent with widespread neuronal loss in late-stage AD. 62 Upregulated genes included those related to type I interferon response, a cytokine-driven transcriptional cascade classically associated with anti-viral activity that can also be triggered by Ab1–42 in primary neural cultures. 63 sEV transport of interferon response transcripts could propagate inflammatory responses throughout the brain. Causal AD genes ( APP , PSEN1 , and PSEN2 ) were observed in sEVs but at decreased levels relative to ND, which may reflect the advanced disease state of our AD samples ( Figures 1G and 1H ). Cell identity influences the sEV transcriptome We identified clear differences in sEV mRNA expression across cell types, including in disease-relevant genes. Our data suggest that multiple cell types could contribute disease-relevant sEV mRNAs, which could help identify the cell types most suitable for targeted sEV isolation for biomarker detection. Brain-derived sEVs are believed to be present in serum, and cell-type-specific markers have been used to immunocapture putative brain sEVs, albeit with debated purity. 64 – 67 Our data provide a point of comparison for expression signatures associated with sEVs from distinct cell types. Upon validation of cell-type-specific markers on serum sEVs, brain-derived sEV mRNA cargo could be monitored toward appropriate staging of disease state. 45 , 68 RNA-binding motifs support selective packaging of mRNAs in sEVs Long-read sequencing and motif analysis allowed us to identify 42 sequences over-represented in sEV-enriched mRNAs. These RBP motifs could potentially be used to pseudotype key brain-relevant mRNAs to increase the likelihood of vesicular packaging. Indeed, by flanking Cre mRNA with the 5′ and 3′ UTRs of PEG10, a retrovirally derived gene, Cre mRNA was packaged into endogenously assembled PEG10 capsids. 18 This result highlights the potential power of bioengineered transcripts for sEV delivery. sEVs are also potential vehicles for the administration of therapeutic mRNAs because they may circumvent challenges in penetrating the blood-brain barrier and do not trigger immune activation in the same way as exogenous lipoparticles or adeno-associated viral vectors. 69 sEVs and their cargoes share exogenous and endogenous viral features The phenomenon of intercellular exchange of membrane-bound mRNA via sEVs is reminiscent of viral transmission. Some retroviruses utilize endocytic machinery for biogenesis and therefore share biochemical characteristics with endogenous sEVs, enabling evasion of immune surveillance. Eukaryotic genomes contain myriad sequence remnants of ancient viral infections that collectively make up at least 54% of the human genome. 70 Some of these viral sequences have been co-opted for endogenous functions, including genes with sequence homology to the “Gag” capsid portion of Ty3/Gypsy and other viral capsids. Among these genes are ARC and PEG10 , which are expressed in the brain and encode proteins capable of self-assembling into mRNA-encapsulating capsids. 15 , 18 , 71 – 73 We detected mRNAs encoding for both in our human and murine sEV preparations, with high expression and enrichment of Peg10 in murine primary neuronal and astrocyte sEVs ( Figure S3 ). These virus-like particles are likely present within our sEV samples—with similar size and sedimentation to sEVs—and could retain other viral properties. Similarities to RNA viruses extend to retrotransposon-derived TEs, though most of these germline elements are believed to have lost the ability to propagate themselves. 74 However, in the case of LINE1, ~80–100 members of the L1Hs subfamily are predicted to be retrotransposition competent. 75 We found that L1Hs mRNAs were highly abundant in human-brain-derived sEVs and significantly enriched in sEVs over bulk brain tissue. LINE1 transcripts have previously been reported in brain-tumor sEVs with detectable reverse-transcriptase activity potentially associated with LINE1 ORF2p expression. 76 While active L1Hs elements preferentially self-retrotranspose, they are also capable of trans retrotransposition of Alus and cellular mRNAs, leading to the creation of processed pseudogenes. 77 , 78 Our data demonstrate that LINE1 is packaged in ND and AD human brain sEVs, where it could contribute to somatic changes. A form of somatic gene recombination that also involves reverse transcription of cellular mRNAs (e.g., APP ) 37 , 79 produces genomic cDNAs that occur somatically and include myriad forms of the gene with translatable sequences, 80 , 81 paralleling retroviral provirus and processed pseudogene retrotransposition. Increased DNA content 82 previously reported in neurons of ND and AD brains 82 , 83 might be generated via viral-like processes mediated by sEV transfer. 82 In cell culture models, sEVs containing a LINE1 reporter construct have been shown to generate new LINE1 loci in recipient cells. 84 Given the longevity of neural cells, particularly neurons, we speculate that sEVs could contribute mRNA not only for translation but also for reverse transcription leading to genomic mosaicism in the brain. 81 , 85 Limitations of the study Isolation of sEVs from solid tissue often raises concerns of sample contamination with intracellular vesicles or reformed membrane blebs. Great care is taken during the sEV isolation process to dissociate human brain tissue gently using enzymatic digestion and limited mechanical disruption to avoid cell lysis as much as possible. 19 , 86 , 87 This is in contrast to protocols for the creation of synaptosomes, which typically use mechanical tissue dissociation to produce larger structures including whole synapses containing synaptic vesicles and mitochondria. 88 We screened each sEV preparation for cell debris markers indicative of excessive lysis. Nevertheless, low levels of cell lysis are unavoidable, underscoring the value of the corroborating data we obtained from cultured primary neurons, astrocytes, and microglia. Analysis of sEV mRNA from these homogeneous cultures may hint at cell-type-specific sEV pathways but is only an approximation of what may occur in an intact brain. Though we detected differences in sEV transcriptomes across disease state, the detection of sex-specific changes or identification of robust biomarkers for clinical diagnosis and staging of AD would require datasets with higher sample size, which is limited by high tissue inputs to current protocols. Although long-read sequencing robustly identifies full-length transcripts, the poly-dT-primed paradigm used for cDNA synthesis excludes detection of 3′ truncated transcripts lacking a poly(A) tail. Furthermore, limitations in long-read sequencing depth preclude identification of sEV-specific isoforms. Finally, while our data highlight several potential functions of sEV mRNA, we have not tested them experimentally and cannot report which sequences may undergo endosomal escape necessary for translation in the cytoplasm. Conclusion We document selective packaging of full-length and diverse mRNA sequences in brain-derived sEVs. sEV mRNA content changed with AD state and across several brain cell types. Thousands of full-length mRNAs in sEVs, including those with putative RBP motifs, were identified. These processes resemble retroviral-like transfer of mRNA, raising intriguing questions about possible somatic retroinsertion into the genome. Future work will determine packaging mechanisms and functional consequences of key mRNAs with relevance to biology, disease processes, and translational uses including biomarkers and therapeutic delivery platforms. STAR★METHODS RESOURCE AVAILABILITY Lead contact Further information and requests for the resources and reagents may be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Jerold Chun ( jchun@sbpdiscovery.org ). Materials availability This study did not generate new unique reagents. Data and code availability Fastq files for Illumina reads for mouse primary cells and sEVs are available through GEO with accession number GSE243611 . Iso-Seq data (unmapped bam files) from mouse cells and sEVs are available through GEO under accession number GSE255462 . Bulk RNA-sequencing (fastq files) and Iso-Seq data (unmapped bam files) from human tissue and sEVs have been deposited in the European Genome-Phenome Archive (EGA) through accession numbers EGAD50000000042 for short-read data and EGAD50000000043 for long-read data. These data are controlled-access and require a signed data use agreement between the data access committee (DAC) and the user. Processed, de-identified data is available through Mendeley, doi: 10.17632/9j94cwxx28.1 This paper does not report original code. Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this work paper is available from the lead contact upon request. EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS Animals All animal protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute and conform to National Institutes of Health guidelines and public law. Generally, mice were housed with littermates on a 12-h light/dark cycle at 70–74°F with access to food and water ad libitum . All mice were from the strain C57BL/6J and were used for primary cell isolation at days E18, P3, and P8 for neurons, astrocytes, and microglia, respectively. Brains were pooled from male and female pups in each culture preparation. Selection of human brain tissue samples All human tissues were obtained from IRB-approved brain banks. Isolation of sEVs from tissue requires relatively high amounts (500mg) of tissue with maximum structural integrity. 19 We requested tissue blocks with short (ideally less than 10 h and no more than 24 h) postmortem intervals (PMI). We screened 65 tissue samples for RNA integrity and then maximized the number of samples for processing after matching non-diseased (ND) and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) brains by age, sex, PMI, and RNA integrity number (RIN). Five female subjects and seven male subjects were included in each disease group (ND and AD). The meta data regarding the 24 samples used for sEV isolation can be found in Table S1 . Primary cell cultures Isolation and culture of primary astrocytes Primary astrocytes were isolated from 8 C57BL/6J pups at P3. Pups were sacrificed by decapitation and cortices were isolated by dissection. Tissue was dissociated with the Miltenyi Neural Tissue Dissociation Kit (Papain) (Cat. No. 130-092-628) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Astrocytes were isolated by positive selection using the Miltenyi anti-ACSA-2 MicroBead kit, mouse (Cat. No. 130-097-678) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were plated in T75 flasks coated overnight with 0.01% PLL (Cultrex) and cultured for approximately 8 days in serum-free media containing 50% Neurobasal Medium, 50% DMEM, Pen/Strep, 1mM sodium pyruvate, 1mM L-glutamine, 2X B27 supplement, and 5 ng/ML HBEGF. Full media changes were conducted every other day. Isolation and culture of primary microglia Primary microglia were isolated from 8 C57BL/6J pups at P7. Pups were anesthetized with Isoflurane and sacrificed by decapitation and cortices were isolated by dissection. Tissue was dissociated with the Miltenyi Biotec Neural Tissue Dissociation Kit (Papain) (Cat. No. 130-092-628) according to manufacturer’s instructions including the optional Debris Removal (Cat. No. 130-109-398) and Red Blood Cell Lysis (Cat. No. 130-094-183) steps. Microglia were isolated by positive selection using the Miltenyi Biotec anti-CD11 MicroBead kit, human and mouse (Cat. No. 130-093-634) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were plated in T75 flasks coated overnight with 0.01% PLL (Cultrex) and cultured for approximately 10 days in DMEM with 10% FBS, 1% Pen/Strep, and M-CSF (10 ng/mL), with half media changes every other day. Isolation and culture of primary neurons Primary neurons were isolated from ~8 C57BL/6J embryos at E18. Pregnant C57BL/6J mothers were sacrificed by Isoflurane overdose followed by cervical dislocation. Embryos were decapitated, brains dissected, and meninges removed from cortices. Cortices were dissociated with the Miltenyi Neural Tissue Dissociation Kit-Postnatal Neurons (Cat. No. 130-094-802) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The cell suspension was depleted of non-neuronal cells using Miltenyi’s Neuron Isolation Kit, mouse (Cat. No. 130-115-389) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were plated in 10cm dishes coated overnight with 0.01% PLL (Cultrex) and then for ~4 h with Laminin (2μg/cm 2 ) and cultured for 10 days in Neurobasal Plus media with 2% B27-plus supplement, 0.5% Pen/Strep, and 2.5 mL/L GlutaMAX. Media was supplemented with 1X CultureOne Supplement to slow outgrowth of neural progenitors not removed by magnetic beads. Neuronal cultures received half media changes every other day. METHOD DETAILS Human brain sEV isolation sEVs were isolated from 500mg postmortem human brain tissue 19 per preparation, cryo-sectioned in 250μm sections. Tissue was dissociated in Hibernate-A buffer with 75U/mL collagenase type 3 using a Miltenyi gentleMACs Octo Dissociator for 20 min at 37°C using the ABDK1 program. The dissociation reaction was stopped by the addition of 10X protease and phosphatase inhibitors and 10mM EDTA. Samples were centrifuged to pellet debris at 4 °C at 300xg for 5 min, 2000xg for 10 min, and 10,000xg for 30min. The supernatant was then passed through a 0.20μm polyethersulfone filter before being loaded onto a discontinuous sucrose density gradient (0.6 M, 1.3 M, and 2.5 M in 20mM HEPES buffer) and centrifuged at 180,000xg for 3 h in an SW41Ti rotor at 4°C. Three fractions were collected, corresponding to overlaid supernatant (F1), 0.6M sucrose (F2), and 1.3M sucrose (F3). These fractions were washed by diluting in ice-cold DPBS and then sEVs were pelleted by centrifugation at 100,000xg for 1 h in an S80 AT3 rotor. sEV pellets were resuspended in DPBS plus protease inhibitors and divided into aliquots and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C prior to characterization by western blot (WB), RNA sequencing, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA). Characterization ( Figure S1 ) showed that F1, the lowest density of the discontinuous sucrose gradient, contains larger EVs not pelleted in the 10,000g spin or eliminated by 0.20μm filtration. F2 contained small EVs, consistent with an exosome-enriched population, validated by WB, TEM, and NTA. F3 contained high density EVs, including some very small EVs as well as some with endosomal proteins, as noted by WB, TEM, and NTA. Protein analysis Lysates were generated from sEVs by the addition of 10X RIPA buffer with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Lysates were also generated from brain homogenate (BH, 20μm of tissue plus 150μL of PBS) and brain homogenate treated with collagenase (BH + C, 150 μL of the 300xg pellet). Brain homogenate samples were passed through 22G and 25G needles and then sonicated on ice five times for 5 s on and 10 s off. Samples were incubated on ice for 20 min, then spun at 10,000xg for 15 min. Protein concentrations were determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit using the standard range for human brain sEVs and the enhanced range for primary cell sEVs. Protein lysates were denatured by the addition of 4X LDS sample buffer with or without 10X Bolt reducing buffer and heating to 70°C for 10 min and then 80°C for 2 min. Samples were run on Bolt Bis-Tris (4–12%) polyacrylamide gels at 150V for 1 h iBlotII was used for protein transfer with the P0 program and blots were blocked using Intercept Blocking buffer mixed 1:1 with PBS. Blots were probed with primary antibodies against EV markers Flotillin (BD Bioscience # 610820, 1:500), TSG101 (Millipore Sigma #T5701, 1:1000), CD81 (Santa Cruz # sc-23962, 1:500), and CD63 (Fisher Scientific #556019, 1:500) and debris markers Calnexin (Abcam #ab22595, 1:2000), and VDAC (Cell Signaling #4661, 1:500). Proteins were visualized with IRDye secondary antibodies (Li-Cor #926–32213 and # 926–68070, both at 1:10,000) and imaged on a Bio-Rad ChemiDoc. Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis was performed using Malvern Panalytical’s NanoSight LM14 instrument to measure the size distribution of vesicles. Samples were diluted 1:500 or 1:1000 in sterile DPBS to a final volume of 1mL. Solutions were injected with a syringe pump set to 50 at an ambient temperature of 22°C. The camera level was 11–13, and the detection threshold for analysis was 3–4. Three to six 90 s videos were taken per sample, depending on the concentration. The software used for analysis was version NTA 3.1 Build 3.1.54. Particle data from camera frames where bubbles were visible were excluded from analysis. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) Particles were visualized using negative staining transmission electron microscopy on a JEOL 1400 plus microscope. Vesicles were adsorbed onto a carbon-coated grid and then stained with uranyl acetate for 1 min and washed 3 times in water, then dried. Multiple locations were imaged on each grid. Representative images were taken at 5000X, 10,000X, and 25,000× magnification. RNA extraction from human brain EVs Human brain sEVs were treated with 10 μg/mL RNase A for 20min in a 37°C water bath prior to RNA extraction to digest any residual extravesicular RNAs. RNase digestion was stopped with the addition of 2.5 units/μL RNase Out and incubation for 5 min at room temperature. RNA was extracted from sEVs using the Qiagen RNeasy Micro kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions including an on-column DNase treatment. RNA was also extracted from 20μm of “bulk” tissue from the same postmortem tissue blocks used for sEV extraction using the Qiagen RNeasy Mini kit according to manufacturer’s instructions. RNA quality was assessed using the Agilent Advanced Analytical Fragment Analyzer ( Figure S2 ). Purity assessment of primary cell cultures Purity of cultures was validated by immunofluorescence. Cells were plated on PLL-coated slides and fixed using 4% PFA in PBS for 15 min at room temperature on day of sEV collection. Samples were permeabilized with PBS +0.1% Triton X- for 15 min then blocked using DAKO Universal Antibody Diluent (Agilent #S302283–2). Slides were incubated with primary antibodies overnight in DAKO +0.1% Tween 20. Astrocyte cultures were stained for astrocyte marker GFAP (Neuromics #CH22102, 1:2000), microglia marker IBA1 (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals #011–27991, 1:500), and fibroblast marker COL1A (Cell Signaling Technology #72026T, 1:1000) ( Figure S4 ). Neuron cultures were stained for neuron markers NEUN (Sigma-Aldrich #MABN140, 1:1000) and MAP2 (Neuromics # CH23032, 1:1000) and astrocyte marker GFAP (Neuromics #CH22102, 1:2000) ( Figure S4 ). Microglia were stained for IBA1 (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals # 011–27991, 1:500) and CX3CR1 (Invitrogen #14-6093-81, 1:250) and astrocyte marker GFAP (Neuromics #CH22102, 1:2000) ( Figure S4 ). Slides were washed 3 × 10 min with PBS +0.1% Tween 20. Secondary antibodies (488nm Donkey anti-chicken, #SA172000, 594nm Donkey anti-Goat #A11058, 594nm Donkey anti-Mouse # A21203, and 647nm Donkey anti-Rabbit # A31573 ) were applied at 1:1000 dilutions in DAKO +0.1% Tween 20 and incubated at room temperature for 1 h before being washed as previously described. Samples were mounted in VECTAShield hardset antifade mounting medium with DAPI (Vector #H-1800) and imaged the next day on a Keyence BZ-X810 at 20x. Culture purity was quantified using QuPath (v0.4.4) with the “Positive Cell Detection” function with total nuclei identified by DAPI staining and either nuclear (for NEUN in neurons) or cytoplasmic (for IBAI in microglia or GFAP in astrocytes) detection of appropriate cellular markers. Collection of mouse primary cell sEVs 48 h prior to collection of astrocyte and microglia sEVs, media was changed to DMEM with pen/strep and 10% EV-depleted fetal bovine serum. On the day of sEV isolation, microglia were primed with the addition of LPS (1 μg/mL) for 4 h. 7 Both astrocytes and microglia were stimulated to release sEVs with the addition of ATP (5mM) for 15min prior to collection of media. 5 , 7 Neurons required no added stimulation beyond culture in Neurobasal plus media that promotes neuronal activity and therefore sEV release. Media was removed from cells and stored on ice while cells were collected by scraping in ice-cold DPBS. Media and cells were spun at 2,000xg for 10 min. Next, media supernatant was transferred to ultracentrifuge tubes and spun at 10,000xg for 30 min at 4°C using an SW28 rotor to clear media of large vesicles. Meanwhile, the cell pellets were resuspended in PBS, divided in two, and repelleted at 1000g for 5 min before being stored at −80°C. Cleared media was transferred to fresh ultracentrifuge tubes and spun at 100,000xg for 2 h at 4°C using an SW28 rotor to pellet small EVs. Pellets were washed by resuspension in 6mL of ice-cold sterile DPBS and re-pelleted using an S80 AT3 rotor at 100,000xg for 70min. Pellets were resuspended in 50mL sterile DPBS with protease inhibitors and frozen at −80°C until protein or RNA extraction. RNA extraction from mouse primary cell sEVs RNA was extracted from sEVs using the Qiagen RNeasy Micro kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions, including an on-column DNase treatment. RNA was also extracted from sEV-source cells using the Qiagen RNeasy Mini kit according to manufacturer’s instructions including on-column DNase treatment. Library preparation for short-read sequencing Approximately 1ng of sEV, human brain tissue, or mouse cell RNA was used for cDNA synthesis with NEBNext Single Cell/Low Input RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (E6421), which utilizes poly-DT primed cDNA synthesis to enrich for poly-adenylated transcripts. Libraries were amplified with 15 cycles of PCR. Precisely 1ng of cDNA was used to generate barcoded sequencing libraries using Illumina’s Nextera-XT DNA Library Preparation Kit (FC-131-1096) and IDT for Illumina Nextera DNA unique dual indexes (20027213). Human sEV and bulk libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq with 2 × 150 base pairs paired-end read configuration, targeting 20–30 million reads per sample. Mouse sEV and cell libraries were sequenced on Illumina NovaSeq with 2 × 150 base pairs paired-end read configuration, achieving 40–50 million reads per sample. Short-read RNA-seq pre-processing Salmon (v1.8.0) was used to index the GRCm39 mouse reference genome and Gencode M29 reference transcriptome for primary cell RNA-seq analysis. 21 The GRCh38 human reference genome and Gencode v39 reference transcriptome were indexed for EV/bulk RNA-seq. The quant function was used to map and quantify the reads. Downstream analysis in DESeq2 was performed after importing the salmon quantification files into R using tximport (v1.22.0). 91 SalmonTE v0.4 was used to quantify reads corresponding to transposable element families. 28 Differential expression analysis Differential expression analysis was conducted in R using the DESeq2 package. 22 In the human dataset, genes with fewer than 10 reads in fewer than 12 samples were excluded from analysis and RIN was controlled for as factor of “high” (≥6) or “low” (&lt;6) in the design formula ( Figure S2 ). Differential expression for both human and mouse samples was done using group analysis, as recommended in the DESeq2 package vignette. Comparisons were made using Wald test with Bonferroni correction. Data was visualized with ggplot2, and EnhancedVolcano. 93 Gene ontology analysis was done using Metascape. 23 When necessary, gene name conversions between human and mouse were done using the biomaRt package (v2.54.1). 92 Expression analysis of neurodegeneration-relevant genes A list AD-relevant genes was derived from a meta-analysis of AD GWAS studies. 25 Selected genes were identified as GWAS hits in 2 or more studies. Expression levels were extracted as normalized gene counts from DESeq2 analysis within sample groups (e.g., bulk only or sEVs only). Differential expression in the form of log 2 (fold changes) were compiled from DESeq2 results with the relevant pairwise comparisons of sEVs versus bulk/cells. RT-qPCR validation of DEGs from primary mouse culture RNA-seq datasets RT-qPCR was used to validate differential expression in sEVs versus cells observed using NGS ( Figure S5 ). cDNA libraries were diluted in nuclease free water for reactions with Taqman probes for Rps12, Rplp0, Ybx1, Ftl1, Ldhb, and Cst3 . Reactions were prepared in triplicate and run on a 364-well plate. The qPCR was run on a CFX-384 instrument with the following protocol: 50°C for 2 min, 95°C for 2 min, and (95°C for 3 s, 60°C for 30 s) for 50 cycles. The following Taqman probes were used with the Taqman assay (Life Technologies Cat. No. 4448892): Rps12- Mm03030276_g1, Rplp0- Mm01974474_gH, Ybx1- Mm00850878_g1, Ftl1- Mm03030144_g1, Ldhb- Mm01267402_m1, Cst3- Mm00438347_m1. Unpaired t-tests were used to compare expression levels in cells versus sEVs based on delta Cq values. Library preparation for long-read sequencing Human brain bulk tissue and sEV and murine primary cell and sEV cDNA libraries generated using the NEBNext Single Cell/Low Input RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina underwent 10 cycles of reamplification using the same kit. Samples were cleaned up with 1.2X ProNex beads (VWR NG2001). 20ng of cDNA from each human sample or 100ng of each murine sample was used as input for the preparation of SMRTbell libraries according to the “PacBio Barcoded Overhang Adapters for Multiplexing Amplicons” protocol using the SMRTbell express template prep kit 2.0. Human samples were pooled according to their group: AD bulk, AD sEVs, ND bulk, or ND sEVs. Sequencing primer v4 kit and Sequel II Binding Kit 2.1 were used for human samples. Each human sample group was sequenced on 1 SMRTCell on the PacBio Sequel II with a movie time of 10 h. Murine samples were combined by sample type: the first pool consisted of astrocyte, microglia, and neurons cells and the second pool consisted of astrocyte, microglia, or neuron sEVs. Sequencing primer 3.1 kit and Sequel II Binding Kit 3.1 were used for murine samples. Each pool was sequenced on 2 SMRTCells on the PacBio Sequel II with a movie time of 24 h. Iso-Seq analysis Recommendations in the cDNA_Cupcake repository (as of January 15, 2021) were generally followed. Subreads generated on the PacBio Sequel II for each sample were processed into consensus reads with ccs (v6.0.0) with parameter –min-rq 0.9. Reads with improper primer orientation were removed using lima (v1.10.0) with the –isoseq parameter. isoseq3 (v3.4.0) refine was used to clip poly-A tails and remove concatemer reads. Reads were clustered to create high-quality transcript consensus reads using isoseq3 cluster. These high-quality transcripts were mapped to the human reference genome (hg38) or mouse reference genome (GRCm39) using minimap2 (v2.17). 89 After mapping, the transcripts were collapsed into non-redundant isoforms using cDNA_Cupcake collapse_isoforms_by_sam.py. Classification and quality control filtering of the resulting unique isoforms were analyzed using a modified version of SQANTI3 (v4.1, https://github.com/christine-liu/SQANTI3/tree/SQANTICL ). The filtered classification and genePred files were then used as inputs to isoSeQL (v1.0.0, https://github.com/christine-liu/isoSeQL ). Motif analysis using MEME suite Human brain sEV-enriched isoforms were identified as those that were enriched 5-fold or higher with p &lt; 0.05 via paired t test in sEVs over bulk brain tissue and were detected in at least 6 sEV samples. For murine samples, sEV enriched-isoforms were defined as those that were enriched 3-fold or higher with p &lt; 0.05 by paired t test and were detected in all 3 sEV samples per cell type. FASTA files containing the longest read for each enriched isoform were used for motif analysis in MEME Suite. STREME was used for ab initio discovery of motifs 8–15 base pairs long enriched with p &lt; 0.05 using Fishers’s exact test. 40 Tomtom was used to predict known motifs within STREME results using the AtTRACT database of RBP motifs. 44 , 94 SEA was used to detect enrichment of AtTRACT dataset motifs within the sEV enriched isoforms. 46 , 94 Mouse STREME motifs were mapped to human STREME motifs to identify shared motifs. QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS All data have been analyzed using valid statistical methods. Statistical analysis was performed in R using relevant packages and in Metascape 23 and MEME Suite 39 per specified guidelines for each type of data input. p-values are reported in the results, figures, and figure legends. Briefly, differential expression analysis performed on short-read RNA Seq data with DESeq2 22 utilized Wald test with Bonferroni correction. Based on the mean-dispersion relationship of the data, a local dispersion fit was used for the creation of the general linear model. Significance was defined as p-adj&lt;0.01 for bulk/cells versus sEVs comparisons or p-adj&lt;0.05 for AD versus ND sEVs. Gene Ontology Analysis of DEGs was conducted with Metascape, 23 which calculates p values using the hypergeometric test with Benjamini-Hochberg p value correction. Isoform composition from long-read PacBio data was compared across sample types using paired t-tests in human samples to control for inter-individual differences and unpaired t-tests in mouse samples due to the shared genetic background. Statistical evaluation of motif analysis was performed in MEME Suite 39 using Fisher’s exact test for STREME 40 and SEA 46 analysis and significance was defined at p &lt; 0.05. Supplementary Material 1