Characteristics of publicly available digital dementia risk screening tools: A scoping review

Background Alzheimer's disease and related dementias have long prodromal phases during which addressing modifiable lifestyle factors may help delay onset. Digital dementia risk screening tools are emerging as an accessible method to convey risk information and promote preventive strategies. However, little is known about the characteristics, intended users, and risk factor coverage of these tools. Objective To identify and summarize publicly available digital dementia risk screening tools, including their components (risk factors), administration methods, target populations, and implementation settings. Methods A two-phase systematic search was conducted. Phase 1 involved searching Embase, MEDLINE (Ovid), APA PsycINFO, and Google Scholar for digital dementia screening tools. To be included in this review, tools needed to be publicly available, focused on dementia, containing at least one modifiable risk factor, targeted at adults, and published in English. Phase 2 examined the psychometric properties of the identified tools (when administered to older adults). Results Eleven tools met inclusion criteria: CogDrisk, ANU-ADRI, BDSI, DemPort, UKBDRS, CAIDE, LIBRA, Alzhe Alert, DRA, UKB-DRP, and the Knight Alzheimer's Disease Risk Calculator. Tools were web- or app-based and designed for use by individuals, clinicians, or researchers. While the most recent Lancet Commission outlines 14 modifiable risk factors, only 11 were covered across these tools. Only one tool had reported psychometric properties. Conclusions Several digital tools for dementia risk screening are publicly available, but most remain in early development and require further validation in real-world adult populations. Future research should evaluate their reliability and effectiveness to support early identification and behavior change.

Introduction Over 46 million people worldwide are currently living with Alzheimer's disease and related dementias and without a significant medical advancement this number is expected to increase to 131.5 million by 2050. 1 Brain changes associated with dementia often develop gradually, sometimes decades before noticeable cognitive symptoms appear. 2 Often referred to as the prodromal stage, this stage presents a unique opportunity for the identification of dementia risk factors using screening tools, and subsequent ongoing risk monitoring and implementation of risk reduction strategies. 3 , 4 Digital dementia risk tools are emerging for use by clinicians and the general community to identify and understand dementia risk. According to the Lancet Commission report into dementia prevention, intervention and care, at least 45% of all cases of dementia diagnosed after age 65 years can be attributed to modifiable lifestyle risk factors. 5 , 6 Fourteen empirically supported risk factors for dementia, encompassing physical inactivity, hypertension, diabetes, obesity, smoking, depression, social isolation, air pollution, excessive alcohol consumption, hearing loss, traumatic brain injury, untreated visual loss, high cholesterol, and lower early life educational attainment, have been identified. 6 Research suggests that modifying these risk factors may delay the onset of or mitigate the risk of developing dementia. 7 Digital health technologies have been rapidly adopted in clinical practice over the last decade and are often used to detect risk of developing a range of diseases and disorders, including cardiovascular disease, 8 stroke, 9 and dementia. 10 These digital tools are now being made accessible to the public via web-based platforms, apps, and mobile devices. 11 , 12 Such tools may offer streamlined data collection, efficient real-time risk assessment of individuals, 13 and online automated scoring. Moreover, digital tools may allow easier reach in remote or underserved populations and can be translated for culturally and linguistically diverse (CALD) communities. 11 Smartphones, wearables, and other digital platforms can be used to gather frequent and objective quantitative data and make early risk screening initiatives more accessible. 14 – 16 The field of digital dementia risk screening tools is relatively new, and synthesized information about the nature of these tools including their target populations, administration setting, incorporated risk factors and available psychometric properties, remains limited. 17 , 18 In contrast to previous reviews focused on the predictive and discriminative validity of underlying risk algorithms, 19 , 20 the current scoping review summarizes the operational characteristics of publicly available digital dementia risk tools including administration methods, implementation settings, and therefore, their practical utility. In this scoping review, we define these tools as technology-based platforms, including mobile apps or websites designed to evaluate an individual's dementia risk. Before tools can be translated into clinical practice, a clear understanding of the objectives and characteristics of the range of digital dementia risk screening tools is required. 21 The digital tools highlighted in this scoping review include various established modifiable dementia risk factors identified by the Lancet Commission 5 , 6 and will be referred to as “established risk factors” throughout this review. Consequently, the primary aim of this scoping review was to identify and synthesize the properties of publicly available digital dementia risk screening tools, including the contexts of use, platforms of administration, incorporated risk factors and target populations. The secondary aim was to report on the psychometric properties of the available digital tools. Methods This narrative scoping review was developed in accordance with the guidance provided in the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) 22 and adhered to the Joanna Briggs Institute methodology for scoping reviews. 23 The search strategy followed the Population, Concept, Context (PCC) framework proposed by Arksey and O’Malley. 24 The search strategy followed a two-phase search approach to adequately capture publicly available digital risk screening tools and to present the psychometric properties of the identified tools. An in-depth scoping review protocol was prospectively registered on the Open Science Framework (OSF) database https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E86CU . This scoping review focused solely on synthesizing existing peer-reviewed articles and so did not involve any new research or experiments with humans or animals. Inclusion and exclusion criteria To be included, tools were required to have a peer-reviewed study detailing tool development. Studies were required to be published in English, and the target population comprising of adults aged 18 years and above, regardless of gender or race. Systematic reviews were only used to help source additional primary research studies. To be included, digital risk screening tools needed to include at least one of the 14 modifiable risk factors described in The Lancet Commission: 5 , 6 physical inactivity, hypertension, diabetes, obesity, smoking, depression, social isolation, air pollution, excessive alcohol consumption, untreated visual loss, high cholesterol, hearing loss, traumatic brain injury, and lower early life educational attainment. 5 , 6 All types of publicly available digital tools were considered including those administered via smartphone, tablet, or computer, either through a mobile application or a website. Articles describing digital cognitive screening tools alone (e.g., Mini-Mental State Examination, Montreal Cognitive Assessment) were excluded as their purpose is to assess cognitive performance rather than assess dementia risk based on modifiable factors. However, studies which included a cognitive test as one component among assessment of other dementia risk factors were retained. Additionally, studies that described dementia risk algorithms or calculations that were applied to an existing cohort study but had no adjacent publicly available web application or interface for the general public to use were excluded. Search strategy Phase 1: Identification of digital tools Three databases including MEDLINE, APA PsycINFO, Embase and relevant grey literature from Google Scholar, were systematically searched for tools on 27 April 2023 and updated searches were conducted on 29 November 2024. Targeted grey literature was searched primarily to identify tools that could be traced back to a peer-reviewed article. All articles were first imported into EndNote for manual duplicate removal and then into Covidence 25 for screening. The full search strategy for MEDLINE (Ovid) is presented in Table 1 and the individual strategies for the other databases are included in the Supplemental Material 1 and 2 . Table 1. Search strategy for Ovid MEDLINE ® ALL, 1946 to Nov 2024. Line no. Search term 1 Dementia/ 2 dementia.mp. 3 Alzheimer's Disease/ 4 Alzheimer's disease.mp. 5 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 6 Risk/ 7 risk.mp. 8 Risk Assessment/ 9 risk assessment.mp. 10 Primary Prevention/ 11 primary prevention.mp. 12 predict.mp. 13 reduc*.mp. 14 predict*.mp. 15 prevent*.mp. 16 assess*.mp. 17 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14 or 15 or 16 18 tool.mp. 19 screen.mp. 20 measure.mp. 21 profile.mp. 22 index.mp. 23 indices.mp. 24 profil*.mp. 25 Checklist/ 26 checklist.mp. 27 “Surveys and Questionnaires”/ 28 survey*.mp. 29 questionnaire*.mp. 30 18 or 19 or 20 or 25 or 26 or 27 or 28 or 29 31 mhealth.mp. 32 ehealth.mp. 33 (digital or online or electronic or web* or internet or app* or mobile or Tech* or chatbot or chat-bot).mp. 34 “Sensitivity and Specificity”/ 35 sensitivity.mp. 36 specificity.mp. 37 valid*.mp. 38 reliab*.mp. 39 pilot.mp. 40 develop*.mp. 41 31 or 32 or 33 42 34 or 35 or 36 or 37 or 38 or 39 or 40 43 5 and 17 and 30 and 41 and 42 44 limit 43 to (english language and humans) mp: multipurpose; mHealth: mobile health; eHealth: electronic health Phase 2: Identification of psychometric properties of identified digital tools In Phase 2, the full name and abbreviation of each tool identified in Phase 1 were used as individual search terms on 20 March 2025 in MEDLINE, APA PsycINFO and Embase. This was combined with terms for reliability and validity. The full Phase 2 MEDLINE search strategy is presented in Table 2 . Only studies evaluating the psychometric properties of the digital tools identified in the Phase 1 search were included (i.e., those studies which administered the tool to a sample of participants for completion). That is, studies which detailed the psychometric properties of the underlying risk algorithm of digital tools, such as those which applied the risk algorithm to an existing dataset, were not included in Phase 2. Table 2. Phase 2 search strategy-Ovid MEDLINE ® ALL, 1946 to 2025 March 20. Line no. Search term 1 ANU ADRI.mp. 2 “ANU-ADRI”.mp. 3 “ANU Alzheimer's Disease Risk Index”.mp. 4 “Australian National University Alzheimer's Disease Risk Index”.mp. 5 “Brief Dementia Screening Indicator”.mp. 6 “BDSI”.mp. 7 “CogDrisk”.mp. 8 “Cognitive Health and Dementia Risk Assessment”.mp. 9 “Alzhe Alert”.mp. 10 “LIBRA”.mp. 11 “Lifestyle for Brain health risk score”.mp. 12 “DemPORT”.mp. 13 “Dementia Population Risk Tool”.mp. 14 “DemPort Dementia Calculator”.mp. 15 “Knight Washington DRS”.mp. 16 “Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center Alzheimer Disease Dementia Risk Calculators”.mp. 17 “CAIDE”.mp. 18 “Cardiovascular Risk Factors, Aging, and Incidence of Dementia”.mp. 19 “UKBDRS”.mp. 20 “United Kingdom Biobank Dementia Risk Score Calculator”.mp. 21 “DRA”.mp. 22 “Dementia Risk Assessment”.mp. 23 “UKB-DRP”.mp. 24 “United Kingdom Biobank Dementia Risk Prediction”.mp. 25 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19 or 20 or 21 or 22 or 23 or 24 26 (“reproducibility of results” or “Reproducibility of Results”).mp. 27 Psychometrics/ or psychometric*.mp. 28 Valid*.mp. 29 Reliab*.mp. 30 26 or 27 or 28 or 29 31 25 and 30 32 Limit 31 to yr=”2011-Current” mp: multipurpose; mHealth: mobile health; eHealth: electronic health Data extraction and results synthesis Phase 1: Existing digital tools A data extraction template was developed in advance for the Phase 1 search results in REDCap and pilot tested before full data extraction. The first author (ZR) independently extracted data for all included studies. Accuracy of the data extraction was checked by a second screener (DW) for the same studies with discussion and agreeance of the data collected. Extracted data for the Phase 1 table included: (1) Name of tool, (2) Publicly available website link; Country of origin; (3) Population (Age); Completion time (CT); Implementation Setting defined in this review as the place where the tool was used, i.e., at a clinical setting or non-clinical homebased/community as reported in either the original development paper or on the actual website (4) Platform; Administrator; Risk factors and (5) Year of tool development. Phase 2: Psychometric properties of included tools Data extraction for the Phase 2 search was conducted using an Excel spreadsheet which included (1) Tool Name(s); (2) Citation(s); (3) Reliability (test-retest and internal consistency); (4) Validity (criterion and discriminant); (5) Responsiveness (specificity, sensitivity and predictive value). Data synthesis Relevant data were summarized in Tables 3 and 4 and results were narratively synthesized. Where possible, information for the tools was sought directly from published papers. If this was not possible, publicly available websites of the tools were used, and corresponding authors were contacted to verify information. As this was a descriptive scoping review that aimed to provide an overview of the types of digital dementia risk screening tools available, no methodological appraisal of risk of bias of the included studies was planned or undertaken. Table 3. Characteristics of the included tools extracted from the publicly available website. Name of tool *Publicly available website link Country of origin Tool properties target age (Age) completion time (CT) implementation setting (setting) Platform administrator number of risk factors addressed Year of tool development (based on published development study) United Kingdom Biobank Dementia Risk Score Calculator ( UKBDRS ) 42 https://github.com/MelisAnaturk/dementia_risk_score/blob/main/results/UKB-DRS_Calculator.xlsx UK Age = 50–73 y CT = Not reported Setting = Community Web-based (excel spreadsheet calculator via GitHub only), also accessible on mobile device Individual Self Report / Researcher Risk factors = 12 2023 Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center's Alzheimer Disease (AD) Dementia Risk Calculators 44 https://alzheimerdementiacalculator.wustl.edu/ https://wjw-001.shinyapps.io/ADdementiarisk/ USA Age = 65–100 y CT = Not reported Setting = Community &amp; Research Setting Web-based &amp; Shiny app, also accessible on mobile device Individual Self Report / Researchers Risk factors = 4 &amp; 7 ( web ) &amp; Risk factors = 6 ( R Shiny app ) 2022 United Kingdom Biobank Dementia Risk Prediction ( UKB-DRP ) 43 https://jiayou0907.shinyapps.io/UKB-DRP-Tool/ UK Age = 40–90 y CT = Not reported Setting = Community &amp; Research Web-based ( Shiny app via GitHub only ), also accessible on mobile device Health care personnel Risk factors = 10 2022 Cognitive Health and Dementia Risk Assessment ( CogDrisk ) 32 https://cogdrisk.neura.edu.au/ Australia Age = 18 + y € CT = 10 min Setting = Community &amp; Hospital/clinic Web-based, also accessible on mobile device Individual Self report Risk factors = 17 2022 Dementia Population Risk Tool ( DemPort Dementia Calculator ) 40 https://www.projectbiglife.ca/ Canada Age = 55 + y CT = 3–5 min Setting = Community &amp; Hospital/clinic Web-based, also accessible on mobile device Individual Self Report Risk factors = 15 2021 Lifestyle for Brain Health ( LIBRA ) version 1.31 41 https://www.evidencio.com/models/show/1041 Netherlands Age = 55–100 y CT = Not reported Setting = Community Web-based, also accessible on mobile device Individual Self Report/ Health care personnel Risk factors = 10 2017 Alzhe Alert 31 Contact research team for tool access Spain Age = 20–80 + y CT = Not reported Setting = Community Mobile application Web-based Individual Self Report Risk factors = 14 † 2016 Cardiovascular Risk Factors, Aging, and Incidence of Dementia mobile app ( CAIDE ) 10 Downloadable via Apple App Store Sweden Age = 40–65 y CT = Not reported Setting = Community &amp; Hospital/clinic Mobile application (IOS) Individual Self Report / Health care personnel Risk factors = 7 † 2015 Brief Dementia Screening Indicator ( BDSI ) 39 Contact research team for tool access USA Age = &lt; 80 y CT = Not reported Setting = Community Web-based Individual Self Report / Informant Risk factors = 7 † 2014 Australian National University Alzheimer's Disease Risk Index (ANU-ADRI 35 – 38 ) Contact research team for tool access Australia Age = 40 + y CT = 20–30 min Setting = Community Web-based Individual Self Report Risk factors = 15 2013 Internet-based Dementia Risk Assessment ( DRA ) 30 Contact research team for tool access USA Age = 50–88 y CT =10 min Setting = Community Web-based Individual self report Risk factors = 14 † 2011 Where possible data were extracted from the publicly available weblink. If data were not available on the weblink these data were extracted from the development papers. † number of risk factors reported from the development paper instead of the publicly available website. € website states that individuals aged &gt;18 years can complete the assessment, but evidence-based risk scores only generated for those aged &gt;40 years. CT: completion time; min: minutes; y: years; CogDrisk: Cognitive Health and Dementia Risk Assessment Tool; DemPort: Dementia Population Risk Tool; CAIDE: Cardiovascular Risk Factors, Aging, and Incidence of Dementia; BDSI: Brief Dementia Screening Indicator; UKBDRS: UK Biobank Dementia Risk Score; LIBRA: Lifestyle for Brain Health; USA: United States of America; ANU-ADRI: Australian National University Alzheimer's Disease Risk Index; UKB-DRP: United Kingdom Biobank Dementia Risk Prediction. *Weblinks live on 28 October 2025 (n = 7). Access to other tools via directly contacting research teams or app store. Table 4. Presence of known established modifiable dementia risk factors. Risk factors Digital tools DRA ANU-ADRI BDSI CAIDE Alzhe Alert LIBRA DemPORT CogDrisk UKB-DRP Knight ADRC UKBDRS Non-modifiable Age ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ Biological sex ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ Genetic factors ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚪ ⚫ Modifiable 1. Early Life Less education ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ 2. Mid-Life Hearing loss ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ High cholesterol ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚫ ⚪ ⚫ ⚪ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ Depression ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ Traumatic brain injury ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ Physical inactivity ⚪ ⚫ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ Diabetes ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ Smoking ⚪ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ Hypertension ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ Obesity ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ *Chronic illness (unspecified)* ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ Excessive alcohol consumption ⚪ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ 3. Late life Social isolation ⚪ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ Air pollution ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ Vision loss ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ risk factor present; ⚪ risk factor absent Results Study selection: Phase 1 search The initial database search conducted on 27 April 2023 identified a total of 11,154 records: Embase (n = 4007), MEDLINE (n = 3869), APA PsycINFO (n = 3248), and Google Scholar for grey literature (n = 30). Covidence automatically removed 1408 duplicates, and an additional 8 duplicates were excluded manually during title and abstract screening. After removal of duplicates, 9738 articles were screened by two reviewers (ZR and DW) according to predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria outlined in the review protocol. A total of 9075 articles were excluded at the title and abstract stage. Disagreements were resolved through discussion or consultation with other authors (KL, DD, AS). Pearling of eligible article reference lists identified an additional 20 articles, resulting in 683 full texts retrieved. Of these, 674 were excluded due to the following reasons: Language restrictions (n = 8); Inappropriate tool or aim (n = 512); Ineligible presentation format (conference posters, n = 109; abstracts, n = 30); or Incorrect population (n = 11). An updated search in November 2024 resulted in the screening of 1371 new records by DW and ZR. Of these, 1369 were excluded due to being irrelevant or because they were conference posters or abstracts. Two articles were retained for full-text review. A targeted grey literature search conducted on 29 November 2024 by ZR and MM yielded five additional studies. All full texts were assessed by the author team, and final inclusion decisions were made by consensus. A total of 16 eligible articles describing 11 digital tools met the inclusion criteria and were included in this review. The study selection process for Phase 1 is illustrated in Figure 1 . Figure 1. PRISMA flow diagram describing the Phase 1 screening processes, including total number of studies (n) of eligible digital tools and articles excluded at each screening stage and reasons for exclusion. Phase 2 search Following the Phase 2 search, a total of 754 articles were identified across Embase (n = 431), MEDLINE (n = 258), and APA PsycINFO (n = 65), using the names of previously identified tools along with selected psychometric search terms (e.g., reproducibility of results , psychometric , validity , reliability ) (see Figure 2 and Supplemental Material 3 and 4 ). During title and abstract screening, 75 duplicate records were automatically removed by Covidence. Of the remaining 679 articles, 645 were excluded based on predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria. Screening was conducted independently by two reviewers (ZR and AS), with any disagreements resolved through discussion or in consultation with KL, DD, and MM. Figure 2. PRISMA flow diagram describing the Phase 2 screening process, including total number of studies (n) included and excluded at each screening stage and reasons for exclusion. A total of 33 full-text articles were reviewed to assess their eligibility. Out of these, 32 articles were excluded for various reasons: 3 were conference abstracts only; 21 evaluated non-digital versions or algorithm-only models of the tools (i.e., applied underlying algorithm to an existing dataset); 3 evaluated alternative versions of the tool (short forms that are not publicly available); and 5 lacked relevant outcome measures. Details of studies which were excluded are presented in Supplemental Table 2 . A secondary grey literature search using the same terms identified additional tools such as the Diabetes-Specific Dementia Risk Score (DSDRS), 26 the Montreal Parkinson Risk of Dementia Scale (MoPaRDS), 27 the Modified Dementia Risk Score (MDRS), 28 and the Dialysis Dementia Risk Score (DDRS). 29 These were excluded as they were either frameworks without a publicly available digital component or were based solely on risk algorithms. Following full-text review and consensus among the reviewers, only one study was eligible for synthesis of psychometric properties of the digital tools. Study characteristics All digital dementia risk screening tools included in this review were published after 2011, reflecting the growing innovation and interest in leveraging digital technology for dementia prevention. The earliest identified tool was the Internet-based Dementia Risk Assessment (DRA), 30 (see Supplemental Figure 1 ). There has been a steady increase in the number of tools available since 2011 with a total of 11 different digital tools identified across the 16 studies. The digital tools identified in this review were publicly available with live, accessible websites or apps at the time of data synthesis (see Table 3 ), however access to some of the tools may be limited or dynamic due to licensing. As such, several tools required access to be requested directly from the research teams or developers. These were the DRA, 30 Alzhe Alert, 31 Cognitive Health and Dementia Risk Assessment (CogDrisk), 32 , 33 Cardiovascular Risk Factors, Aging, and Incidence of Dementia (CAIDE), 10 , 34 Australian National University Alzheimer's Risk Index (ANU-ADRI), 35 – 38 Brief Dementia Screening Indicator (BDSI), 39 Dementia Population Risk Tool (DemPort), 40 Lifestyle for Brain Health (LIBRA), 41 United Kingdom Biobank Dementia Risk Score (UKBDRS), 42 , 43 United Kingdom Biobank Dementia Risk Prediction (UKB-DRP) 43 and Knight Alzheimer's Disease Risk Calculator (Knight-ADRC). 44 Data regarding risk factors, completion times, and implementation settings were primarily extracted from the publicly available websites. In instances where this information was not accessible via the weblink, data were supplemented using the original development papers (see Table 3 ). Population: Intended users for digital dementia risk screening tools The digital dementia risk screening tools identified in this review were designed for adults ranging from midlife to older adulthood (see Table 3 ). Tools such as CogDrisk 32 , 33 , 45 and DemPort 40 were intended for use by older adults, while Alzhe Alert 31 covered a broad adult age range suitable for public application. The CAIDE 34 tool was designed for middle-aged adults and designed for use in hospital settings. The LIBRA 41 and UKBDRS 42 tools were designed for adults approaching later life, with administration typically by clinicians or researchers. The UKB-DRP 43 tool was intended for use in clinical settings involving adults from midlife to older age and was designed to be administered by health professionals. Other tools, including BDSI 39 and Knight-ADRC, 44 were developed primarily for older adults and could be completed by individuals or informants. The ANU-ADRI 44 was designed for self-administration by adults in midlife and older age, with versions available for both individuals and clinicians. Completion times varied considerably among the tools, ranging from a few minutes to about half an hour (see Table 3 ). The shortest completion times were reported for DemPort 40 and DRA, 30 requiring approximately 3–10 min. More comprehensive tools like CogDrisk 32 , 33 , 45 and the ANU-ADRI 38 versions required around 20 to 30 min to complete. Several tools like the LIBRA, 41 Alzhe Alert, 31 CAIDE. 34 UKBDRS, 42 UKB-DRP, 43 BDSI 39 and the Knight-ADRC 44 did not specify completion times publicly. Context: Modifiable risk factors identified The digital tools incorporated a range of established modifiable dementia risk factors identified by the Lancet Commission 6 which included education (assessed by 9 tools), followed by diabetes (8 tools), obesity typically measured by body mass index and depression (each assessed by 7 tools), then high cholesterol (low-density lipoprotein (LDL)), physical inactivity and hypertension (each assessed by 6 tools). Less commonly assessed risk factors were traumatic brain injury and excessive alcohol consumption (4 tools each), and smoking and social isolation (3 tools each). In addition, several tools also accounted for non-modifiable factors such as age (11 tools), biological sex (8 tools), and genetic markers like apolipoprotein E ε4 ( APOE4 ) (4 tools). It is important to note that the UKBDRP, 43 was included in this review as it addresses long-standing illness (chronic disease) as modifiable risk factor, which could be any of the known modifiable risk factors like diabetes and hypertension. Table 4 provides a detailed summary of how these risk factors are covered across the eleven digital tools. 6 In addition to the established risk factors identified by the Lancet Commission, 6 seven other risk factors were assessed across more than one digital tool. These included stroke (included in 5 tools), family history of dementia (4 tools), diet, causal mutations (each in 3 tools), cognitive activity or engagement, fish consumption, and coronary heart disease (each in 2 tools). Additional risk factors were identified, but none were assessed by more than one tool. These included socioeconomic disadvantage, mother's age at death, overall health status, longstanding illness, personal history of neurological or cardiovascular disease, geographical location, large family size, severe memory complaints, ethnicity, a variety of chronic conditions such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), epilepsy, heart disease, diabetes, depression, and anxiety, as well as factors like multilingualism, marital and living status, number of medications, pesticide exposure, insomnia, atrial fibrillation, stress, leg fat percentage, reaction time, peak expiratory flow, mean corpuscular volume, pairs matching time, genetic markers, hippocampal volume (MRI), amyloid PET scans, and composite imaging biomarkers (see Supplemental Table 1 ). Differences between the tools reflect the varied research aims, target populations, and development methodologies of each tool. For instance, CogDrisk 32 , 33 covers nine of the identified modifiable risk factors. ANU-ADRI 35 – 38 includes broader lifestyle factors such as fish consumption, cognitive activity, and pesticide exposure, capturing a total of 12 to 15 risk factors. DemPort, 40 while including 15 risk factors, excludes high cholesterol and traumatic brain injury, instead prioritizing health status and multilingualism (refer to Table 4 and Supplemental Table 1 ). This variation in methodological focus demonstrates how each tool is designed to meet specific research goals and address the unique needs of the populations they target; this aspect, however, was not explored in great detail in this scoping review. The LIBRA 41 tool assesses eight identified risk factors and includes coronary heart disease on its public website but omits some elements from its original development study, such as cognitive activity, Mediterranean diet, and renal dysfunction. The UKBDRS 42 tool incorporates five modifiable risk factors along with additional items like parental dementia history, material deprivation, stroke, and living arrangements. The UKB-DRP 43 includes only two established modifiable risk factors but collects a wide range of physiological and demographic variables, such as leg fat percentage, mother's age at death, and number of medications taken. The BDSI 39 includes four established risk factors and adds financial/medication management and stroke. The CAIDE 34 tool incorporates six established risk factors and non-modifiable risk factors: age and biological sex. Knight-ADRC 44 includes only one established risk factor and family history in its demographic model, while focusing primarily on biomarkers like MRI hippocampal volume, amyloid PET, and causal mutations. Alzhe Alert 31 includes six established risk factors and additional elements like geographic location, family size, and genetic mutations. The early version of the Internet-based DRA 30 included six established risk factors, Parkinson's disease, stroke, neurological history, and family history. A later publication added rare risk factors such as brain tumor and severe memory complaints. The methodologies leading to tool development were also varied, with tools like the ANU-ADRI 35 – 38 and CogDrisk 32 , 33 , 45 taking a more data-driven approach. Age was the only non-modifiable factor consistently included across all tools, whereas genetic risk factors appeared in only a few, including Alzhe Alert, 46 CAIDE, 31 UKB-DRP 43 and UKBDRS 42 tools. Notably, hearing loss, untreated vision loss and air pollution were the three modifiable risk factors identified in the Lancet Commission report 6 which were not included in any of the tools, likely because these factors were only recently added to the Lancet Commission in 2024. Context: Digital platforms of administration Two main platforms were used for administering digital dementia risk screening tools: web-based and mobile applications. Eleven tools were publicly available only on web-based platforms while the CAIDE, 10 , 34 , 47 Alzhe Alert 31 and the Knight-ADRC 44 were the only tools that used both web-based and mobile applications. The UKBDRS 42 was delivered via a web-based Excel spreadsheet calculator hosted on GitHub and the UKB-DRP 43 was implemented using an interactive R Shiny web app, also hosted on GitHub. Knight-ADRC 44 was uniquely available across both standard web and through the Shiny app platform. Psychometric properties of the digital risk screening tools Although the underlying risk calculation or algorithm for many of the digital tools have been validated on existing datasets (see Huque et al. 20 for extensive review), only one study identified in our search had reported the psychometric properties of the digital tool when it had been completed by a sample of participants. 37 Borges and colleagues 37 evaluated the psychometric properties of the Portuguese version of the ANU-ADRI in a sample of 100 older adults in Brazil (mean age = 62.6 years, 67% female). 20 for extensive review), only one study identified in our search had reported the psychometric properties of the digital tool when it had been completed by a sample of participants. 37 Borges and colleagues 37 evaluated the psychometric properties of the Portuguese version of the ANU-ADRI in a sample of 100 older adults in Brazil (mean age = 62.6 years, 67% female). The Portuguese ANU-ADRI demonstrated good-retest reliability when measured one week apart (ICC=0.912, &lt;0.001, 95%CI = 0.872, 0.940). After separating the sample into two groups (those from the recruitment site who were seeing specialists (such as Neurologists), and those who were seeing General Practitioners only), there were significant differences in the mean ANU-ADRI total score between groups (Cohen's d = 0.469, 95%CI = 0.070, 0.865) as expected. Finally, the Portuguese ANU-ADRI demonstrated divergent validity, assessed by correlation with Mini Mental State Examination total scores (Spearman's r = −0.350, p &lt; 0.001). Discussion Eleven publicly available digital dementia risk screening tools were identified in this scoping review. These tools varied widely in their target audiences, ranging from adults in midlife and older adults, as well as in time to completion, risk factors assessed and the intended settings of use (general public verses clinical context). All tools were released after 2011, with most becoming available in the past 3 to 5 years, reflecting both the rapid growth of this field and the evolving understanding of modifiable dementia risk factors. In our Phase 2 search, psychometric properties were reported by only one study where the digital tool was administered to a new population (i.e., rather than evaluating the psychometric properties of the underlying risk algorithm using existing datasets), 19 , 20 again underscoring the pace at which new tools are being developed and released. Even though psychometric evaluation was identified for only one digital tool, this finding nonetheless contributes important information and underscores the need for further validation of digital tools in the future. Together, these findings may provide researchers and clinicians with a practical synthesis of publicly available tools to guide selection of the most appropriate tools for their target population. The tools varied widely in the range and type of risk factors assessed and how those risks were measured. While most included modifiable risk factors such as education, physical inactivity, diabetes, and hypertension, each tool differed in scope and format. 47 For instance, CogDrisk 30 , 31 emphasises lifestyle factors, whereas the UKB-DRP41 incorporates genetic, biometric, 48 and physiological indicators like leg fat percentage and peak expiratory flow. Such variations influence both the depth of risk profiling and the practicality of implementation. A key consideration is whether additional complexity improves predictive accuracy or simply increases the burden for users and clinicians. 49 Older adults seeking digital solutions may find online applications appealing due to their ease of access and personalization, yet technological barriers can hinder their adoption. 50 To address this, engaging the target population in the development of digital tools (e.g., through co-design) is recommended to ensure digital dementia risk tools and interventions align with their preferences and needs. 51 Several examples of co-design in dementia prevention research are emerging, and extending this approach to the design of digital dementia risk screening tools may enhance acceptability, reach and the widespread implementation of these tools. 52 To ensure these innovations benefit everyone, future research must also consider adapting such tools for individuals with limited digital literacy or access. Accessibility varied considerably across the tools. While some tools, like CogDrisk 32 , 33 and CAIDE, 10 are readily available with a publicly facing website, others are primarily confined to research settings like the Alzhe Alert, 31 DRA, 30 , 46 UKBDRS 42 and UKB-DRP, 43 limiting their widespread use. For example, UKBDRS 42 and UKB-DRP, 43 were only accessible via platforms like Excel 53 and R Shiny 54 apps which may require technical expertise, potentially deterring less tech-savvy users. 55 Moreover, tools such as mCAIDE, 56 LIBRA2, 57 CogDrisk-SF, 58 ANU-ADRI-SF 59 while considered as digital tools in their development papers were not included in the final narrative synthesis because they were not yet publicly available at the time of screening. Given the rapid speed that this field is moving, these tools should also be considered as they become available. Several studies presented non-digital versions (e.g., mCAIDE, 56 LIBRA2, 57 CogDrisk-SF, 58 ANU-ADRI-SF 59 ), dementia risk algorithms or calculations derived from existing cohort studies without a publicly available web application or interface and as such these were also excluded from this paper (see Supplemental Table 4 ). It is important to note that some pen-and-paper versions of the tools included validation metrics that could also be used to assess the validity and reliability of the digital versions. However, since this study focused only on the digital tools, we included only validation papers specific to the digital versions of the tools. The integration of artificial intelligence (AI) in dementia risk tools at the time of publications remains limited but represents a promising direction for enhancing personalization and reducing manual workload. 60 Tools like the UKB-DRP 43 have begun leveraging machine learning to process diverse health indicators and predict dementia risk with greater accuracy over extended timeframes. While some tools may use algorithmic calculations that suggest machine learning techniques, many do not explicitly report AI integration. As AI becomes more accessible, it could enable dynamic, real-time risk profiling, adaptive questionnaires, and personalized intervention recommendations. Several limitations of this scoping review need to be highlighted. Firstly, the review was limited to articles written in English, which may have resulted in some articles where tools have been translated being missed. Additionally, conference abstracts and posters were excluded, potentially limiting the identification of prototype or pilot-stage tools. There was also limited geographic diversity among the included studies, with little representation from Africa or Asia, raising questions about the generalizability of current digital dementia risk screening tools in diverse populations. Given that the largest increase in dementia prevalence worldwide is occurring in developing countries, adapting existing tools and co-designing new ones tailored to the specific risk factors of these populations should be a key research priority moving forward. 61 , 62 More research is needed to evaluate the cross-cultural applicability of specific risk factors and the tools that assess them. 63 Finally, this scoping review identified only one study where psychometric properties were based on the digital tool being administered to a new sample of older adults, rather than applying the underlying risk algorithm to an existing dataset. As a result, psychometric properties identified were limited, and some may be considered less significant for tools where responses are not expected to vary in short time frames (e.g., test-retest reliability). While previous reviews provide important insight into the predictive and discriminative validity of underlying risk algorithms, more work is needed to replicate this in instances where the digital tool is administered to a new sample. 19 , 20 This approach would closely reflect real-world utility of publicly available digital dementia risk screening tools. Conclusion This review identified 11 publicly available digital tools for dementia risk screening, outlining their targeted users, settings and included risk factors. Most have been released within the past five years, reflecting the rapid growth of this emerging field and the evolving nature of understanding modifiable dementia risk factors. These tools show potential for empowering the general public with valuable insights into their brain health and opportunities for early dementia risk reduction, 64 yet many lack comprehensive validation and optimization for diverse populations and settings. By consolidating the current evidence, this review provides researchers and clinicians with a practical foundation for selecting suitable tools and highlights priorities for future development, evaluation and implementation. Supplemental Material sj-docx-1-alr-10.1177_25424823261433534 - Supplemental material for Characteristics of publicly available digital dementia risk screening tools: A scoping review Supplemental material, sj-docx-1-alr-10.1177_25424823261433534 for Characteristics of publicly available digital dementia risk screening tools: A scoping review by Zandile Rwodzi, Maddison L Mellow, Dan Ping Wu, Kate Laver, Dorothea Dumuid and Ashleigh E Smith in Journal of Alzheimer's Disease Reports