Accelerating real‐world prediction and research in Alzheimer's: The M3AD study

Abstract Chronic diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related dementia (ADRD), do not exist solely as isolated entities. Instead, they weave concomitant trajectories of multiple diseases, conditions, behaviors, and risks, mutually influencing each other's course and natural history, in ways yet unexplored. Electronic health records (EHRs) provide us with a unique opportunity to look at related and unrelated clinical trajectories over time, thus potentially providing insight into unrecognized prodromes, while incorporating the complexities of patients' lives. We harmonize and federate a three‐city EHR metaplatform of nearly 10 million patients (∼60,000 with AD/ADRD), which we further embed within census tracts, to contextualize these health trajectories. Our multidisciplinary approach ambitions a unique dynamic platform to inform strategies to tailor risk prediction, complex clinical management, and real‐world evaluation of future treatments of AD/ADRD. We present the rationale for and design of the Multimorbidity Three‐City Alzheimer's Disease EHR (M3AD) Study and real‐world data metaplatform, progress and demonstration of feasibility, its expected singular and complementary contributions to the field. Highlights Our success in living longer lives often brings chronic conditions and multimorbidity. Alzheimer's research should comprise life trajectories’ complexity in multimorbidity. New real‐world analytical approaches allow integrated prediction of Alzheimer's disease. We are building a three‐city electronic health record (EHR) metaplatform for prediction, prevention, and impact We further embed EHR within census tracts to contextualize Alzheimer's trajectories

1 BACKGROUND The aging of the US population represents one of the greatest public health success stories of our time. 1 While this increase in longevity is a testament to advancements in public health and medicine, it also introduces new and significant challenges for public health and clinical practice. Age‐associated health conditions, once rarely observed, are becoming increasingly common, and much remains to be understood about the physiological changes that accompany aging. Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related dementias (ADRD) stand out as particularly remarkable and pressing concerns, affecting more than 7.2 million older Americans, including nearly 35% of individuals aged 85 and older, 2 , 3 thus imposing substantial costs on individuals, their families, the healthcare systems and society. 3 , 4 But AD/ADRD also often develops within the context and trajectories of multiple chronic conditions, multimorbidity, contrasting the complex reality of life with the compartmentalized distinction of clinical specialties. Fortunately, matching these challenges, the possibilities of harnessing data to predict, impact and personalize disease prevention and management have also dramatically improved. The opportunity to collect health and health‐impacting information, quasi‐routinely, with repetition and over time, is now commonplace. While many have focused on the pitfalls of utilizing information that may be imperfect or incomplete, the revolution is already in the fact that this information exists. Indeed, we have moved from a world of paucity of data to a world of data overabundance, where data handling, harmonizing, and privacy play prominently. Separating truth from noise in these real‐world data is worth the systematic, often tedious, methodological efforts, as they mimic the messiness and reality of life . Electronic health records (EHRs) provide us with a unique opportunity to look at related and unrelated clinical trajectories over time, including those of AD/ADRD, thus potentially providing insight into unrecognized prodromes, while incorporating the complexities of patients' lives. This is not simply a theoretical exercise, but an opportunity to expand knowledge, earlier and more often, to match our times. 1.1 Transitioning from single‐disease approach: Why is it difficult to study multimorbidity and trajectories? Certain conditions, including smoking, obesity, hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases, have been identified as risk factors for ADRD, highlighting the vascular contribution to its etiology. 5 , 6 However, the likelihood of individuals having only one chronic condition is low . 7 In fact, nearly 90% of people aged 60 and older are affected by two or more chronic diseases. 8 Multimorbidity, that is, the presence of two or more chronic health conditions, is highly prevalent in AD and associated with faster cognitive decline, higher risk of hospitalization, functional impairment, and mortality. 9 , 10 , 11 Part of the difficulty and complexity of studying multimorbidity and its trajectories is that it is at odds with the health system of the 20th century, built by specialty and end‐target organ diseases (e.g., cardiology, nephrology, pulmonology, neurology). Only recently have more holistic “specialties” emerged, particularly geriatrics (notably plural ). The historical diseased organ‐specific view has shaped the concept of comorbidity, in which one disease is considered primary, with other conditions considered co‐riders or secondary. The historical view also inadvertently frames the patient to that index disease (e.g., a diabetic with coronary disease, a cancer survivor with hypertension) rather than apprehending the patient's care and wellbeing as a whole. Thus, although multimorbidity and comorbidity are often used interchangeably, they are not synonymous and convey different concepts. While not mutually exclusive, they are emblematic of the transition from the single‐disease approach (comorbidity of an index disease) to the complex multimorbidity approach necessitated by the real world. While disease specialization has certainly helped extend life expectancy to date, from a practical point of view, it has also tended to silo care. We posit a need to center the patient within our vision ( Figure 1 ) with the layered complexities of their individual and contextual characteristics over time, to reconstruct and learn from their real‐life journeys, identify prodromes and windows of intervention in real‐life settings. FIGURE 1 Examples of multimorbidity trajectories and complexity patterns in contextual AD/ADRD incidence. AD, Alzheimer's disease; ADRD, Alzheimer's disease and related dementias. 1.2 Do trajectories matter? The progression of morbidities or conditions is important in understanding the onset and trajectories toward and within cognitive impairment and dementia. The specific types, sequencing, and duration of chronic conditions influence disease burden and cognitive outcomes. Several recent publications 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 highlight the association of multimorbidity with the prevalence, and risk of dementia (or its biological and cognitive correlates). However, the widely heterogeneous research focus, study designs and outcome metrics of these pieces of evidence limit the possibility to derive integral conclusions. Yet powerful hints that not only presence or absence of multimorbidity, but also multimorbid trajectories are relevant include an apparent differential role of specific clusters of diseases, where cardiovascular, neuropsychiatric, cognitive, sensory, and functional health appear to play prominently among other clusters 17 , 20 , 21 , 24 ; similarly, while multimorbid conditions accumulate through the life course, a greater count of conditions and/or accelerated increase in the number of conditions seems to be more strongly associated with AD/ADRD, especially when it occurs soon before dementia, potentially helping to predict its occurrence. 15 , 18 , 19 While these positive associations were consistent in cross‐sectional studies, it was less so in longitudinal ones, likely due to heterogeneity of burden and progression of comorbidities, 24 pointing to the complexities of disentangling multimorbid relationships. Moreover, prior studies have not fully considered specific features of multimorbidity trajectories, and have only used a limited number of index conditions and covariates, as well as limited adjustment of estimates, suffering from follow‐up and variable distribution truncation, as well as limitations derived from claims‐based algorithms. 2 MULTIMORBIDITY THREE‐CITY ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE EHR (M3AD) STUDY The M3AD Study aims to address the previously described challenges including multimorbidity, complexity, and heterogeneous disease trajectories. This federated, multiethnic, three‐city EHR infrastructure integrates longitudinal clinical data with neighborhood‐level social determinants of health, enabling secure, high‐resolution analyses of aging and dementia within real‐world multimorbidity contexts. Leveraging machine learning, dynamic prediction, and causal inference methods, the platform aims to identify accelerators and decelerators of AD/ADRD, and to define personalized, real‐world windows of opportunity for prevention and care optimization. This initiative represents an interdisciplinary, data‐driven effort, connecting expertise from epidemiology, medical and bioinformatics, multimorbidity, neurology, aging, biostatistics, natural language processing, social sciences, and population health to advance precision aging research and inform actionable public health strategies. 2.1 Source population Collectively, our multiethnic (White, Black, Hispanic, Asian individuals), three‐city EHR consortium encompasses: New York Presbyterian's Clinical Data Warehouse with 32 years of data (diagnosis, procedures, medications, labs) on 6 million patients (33,000 with AD/ADRD; 23% of them Hispanic); University of Chicago Clinical Research Data Warehouse with &gt; 10 years of data on 2 million patients (11,000 with AD/ADRD; 60% of them Black); and University of Miami Hospital System with 10 years of data on 1.4 million patients (13,000 with AD/ADRD; 50% of them Hispanic). Further, mindful that EHRs often overlook social variables (e.g., race/ethnicity, education, income), known to alter dementia risk at both individual and neighborhood levels, we will “embed” these EHRs in census‐tract level social determinants of health (SDoH) data. Importantly, we are not right‐censoring our federated platform to already collected data but are also framing it prospectively to straddle current and future updates and discoveries in biomarkers, diagnosis, and treatments of AD/ADRD. 2.2 Statement of purpose We advocate for and strive to incorporate trajectories and more refined assessments of multimorbidity anchored on the complexity concepts identified above: (1) Complexity of care management : Multimorbidity implies added challenges in healthcare, including organizational aspects of care (accessibility, coordination, number of providers), polypharmacy (including non‐traditional medicine, herbs, supplements), increased use of high‐level resources (emergency facilities, intensive care unit [ICU]), and fragmented and ineffective care, so an unmanageable number of cluster patterns need to be addressed to effectively treat multimorbidity. This scenario, with few dominant patterns, advocates for a more personalized, patient‐centered approach to multimorbidity. (2) Patient complexity : Involvement of non‐health‐related patient‐level factors (social lifestyle, social connections (differentiated from loneliness), environmental factors, built environment, residential trajectories, etc.) also contributes to complexity in AD/ADRD outcomes (Figure 2 ). FIGURE 2 Conceptual illustration of concordant versus discordant multimorbidity complexity. We will also conduct focused emulated trials of whether and how changes in specific multimorbidity risk factors (e.g., smoking, weight) and manageable aspects of care (e.g., blood pressure control, glycemic control) over time impact the incidence, timing, and progression of AD/ADRD in real‐life settings. 3 METHODS 3.1 Data harmonization, rationale and type of data platform M3AD is harmonizing real‐world data from three main organizations, each of them maintaining their own Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) ‐compliant CDW environment. These data emanate from EHRs, including diagnostics, laboratory values, medications, biomarkers, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images, and other sources. In a second phase, subsets of EHR will be enriched with linked research data from overlapping epidemiological cohort members having received or receiving care at the EHR originating institutions (in our project, these cohorts include NOMAS, INVEST, WHICAP, and Alzheimer's Disease Research Centers (ADRCs), among others). 3.2 Centralized core database versus federated platform 3.2.1 Core database: Pros and cons This is a challenge for M3AD in that it differs from centralized repositories, which do not emanate from RWD but are research databases by design, although with inherent smaller numbers, “removed complexity,” and specified inclusion and exclusion criteria somewhat “detaching” them from real‐world situations. Also, temporal and multisite data variability is a challenge when combining different data sources. For these reasons, pseudonymized datasets that cannot be centralized without high risk of reidentification, or which supplementary datasets cannot be easily placed in the core data warehouse need be kept local at the source institutions. Naturally, across different EHR‐generating sites, data are expected to be heterogeneous both in structure and content. Therefore, while core datasets may be harmonized in a common data model, we posit that each organization should be able to count on different supplementary datasets enriching their core EHR data. This poses a challenge, however, when harmonizing data at a centralized data warehouse since these datasets are expected to evolve (and to have evolved) at different pace and contain characteristics inherent to the institution that produced them. Examples of potential supplementary datasets are cardiometabolic data, inflammatory biomarkers/profiles, MRI images and so on, that may be recorded with varying regularities across clinical institutions. However, highly granular data arising from supplementary datasets (containing biomarkers and –omics –) may introduce a significant risk of reidentification. 25 3.2.2 Federated platform: Pros and cons Aware of the limitations of centralized solutions, researchers from medical informatics and machine learning (ML) realms have advanced the field of federated learning (FL) . FL models are estimated in a distributed manner across several storage nodes placed behind their institutional firewalls. 25 Instead of moving health data to a centralized store, FL uses distributed algorithms to train models across several data sources and only share model parameters, gradients, weights, and partial statistics ( data do not travel, statistical analyses do ). 26 In this way, it improves control on both the data used by ML algorithms and the data items accessed by them. This approach also allows using more data sources and generating more generic ML models (i.e., less overfitted). The main benefit of its distributed nature is that data governance relies on the institution that owns the data. Therefore, local data controllers can adjust access and data processing rules to comply with national and institutional policies. 25 Commonly, the most prudent way to control these sensitive data and preserve privacy is to keep data within the original sources, where consent can be easily revoked and linkage to third party repositories can be carefully audited. In addition, data source record linkage can be performed with clear traceability and quality control. A federated infrastructure allows research teams to manage highly granular data without introducing significant risk of reidentification. 26 However, the benefits of FL also come at a price, because the researchers estimating the models cannot directly observe the data to understand certain behaviors during model development. Consequently, implementation of a distributed architecture requires more resources and time to assure quality. 4 MULTIMORBIDITY 3‐CITY ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE ANALYTIC PLATFORM (M3AD‐MAP) To tackle the above challenges, M3AD‐MAP relies on a hybrid architecture that leverages the current approach operated by the Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics (OHDSI) (purple parts in Figure 3 ), which relies on local semi‐manual aggregations and descriptive statistics approaches, and a federated approach (green parts in the figure) to discover hidden data patterns and produce evidence by using distributed ML. We have decided to use the Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership (OMOP) as a common data model (CDM) through this dual process. FIGURE 3 M3AD analytic platform (M3ĂD MAP) structure and workflow. M3AD, Multimorbidity Three‐City Alzheimer's Disease EHR Study. OMOP Non‐federated Repository (ONR) – (Purple circuit) To allow fast evidence production on M3AD‐MAP using common variables and ensuring that researchers can directly observe data, a core dataset (CoreDS) will be harmonized and loaded in local OMOP repositories so each institution can perform research and share aggregated results with each other, as OHDSI has previously done. The loss of granularity is compensated by a central source with more direct access. Federated machine learning metaplatform (FLM) – (Green circuit). Taking OHDSI architecture as a basis and benefiting from its open source license, 27 we will develop a FLM that (green parts of Figure 3 ): (a) will enable the training of models across different data sources without moving data across institutions’ boundaries; and, (b) will be able to scale to new variables and datasets without impacting the deployed infrastructure. FLM will commit to the OHDSI architecture and will operate on distributed local data warehouses based on OMOP. (See blue cylinders in Figure 3 ). One major advantage of the FL approach is that this dataset may change from institution to institution when RWD from AD biomarkers, MRI images, apolipoprotein E4 (ApoE4), genome‐wide association studies (GWAS) and others are loaded into the local environments, thus leading to an extended dataset (ExtendedDS). With this regard, and consistent with our aims of individualized prediction, we will extend OHDSI's data representation features to accommodate a more granular information. 5 THE CASE FOR “EMBEDDING” EHRS Patients are far more complex than the information captured in EHR. While EHRs provide valuable clinical data, they often fail to account for the broader social constructs that significantly influence a patient's well‐being and outcomes, that is, the environments and circumstances in which individuals are born, grow, live, learn, work, and engage in recreation. Factors such as non‐health level factors, as well as others, play a critical role in shaping health trajectories. Yet, these dimensions are frequently absent or inadequately represented in EHRs, limiting their ability to provide a holistic view of the patient. For instance, lower levels of education can limit access to health information and resources, while persistent poverty often restricts opportunities for preventive care and healthy living. 28 Similarly, prolonged exposure to adversity, such as stressful life events, can lead to chronic stress and inflammation, both of which are recognized contributors to cognitive decline. 29 , 30 With proper privacy and confidentiality protections in place, it is plausible to link historical patient addresses with the National Historical Geographic Information System (NHGIS), or Longitudinal Tract Database (LTDB) to link in harmonized Census data and American Community Survey (ACS) products, projected to uniform tract boundaries, as appropriate. We have adopted this challenge in M3AD, to link EHR data with key SDoH variables in the ACS, including food insecurity, education levels, household income, employment status, race/ethnicity, and insurance coverage. 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 We will also derive variables from census data such as income concentrations at the extreme and use Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to integrate data on environmental conditions and community resources, for example, recreational facilities, green spaces, sidewalks, medical facilities, schools, libraries, religious institutions, traffic patterns, air pollution, crime rates, abandoned housing, and foreclosures. Importantly, with historical addresses, it is possible to assess residential mobility and other types of neighborhood change, documenting contextual trajectories. We are also exploring more personalized embedding for SDoH while maintaining privacy. 6 PROTOCOL FOR AD/ADRD DIAGNOSIS AND VALIDATION AS PROTOTYPE HEALTH OUTCOME IN EHR Given the evolving nature of AD diagnosis as a clinical‐biological entity, we have designed a robust multi‐stage comprehensive approach to identifying AD/ADRD Phenotypes from EHR 35 , 36 (Figure 4 ). Initially, we use structured EHR diagnosis codes to capture “clinically probable AD”, recognizing that such entries may be tangential or incidental. Building on this, we apply a more refined CALIBER‐inspired phenotype method, 37 that incorporates NLP‐extracted variables that are more readily documented in clinical notes 38 , 39 , 40 such as a record of falls, confusion, memory problems, nursing home admission, a referral to a dementia‐related specialty (geriatrics, psychiatry, neurology), and repeated fills of rivastigmine, galantamine, donepezil, memantine, or other medicines typically used to treat patients with AD/ADRD. Validation studies using this approach have shown that at least 74% of AD/ADRD cases present with such corroborating evidence. 41 We further expand the number of NLP‐extracted variables through expert suggestions. We then v a lidate these phenotyping tiers through expert manual review by clinical neurology team from our 3‐city consortium, and through secure EHR linkage with overlapping and established long‐term research cohorts at our sites (e.g., NOMAS, INVEST, WHICAP, 1FL ADRC, CU‐ADRC, COMPASS, All of Us) with extensive clinical and biomarker data with etiologic and clinical AD/ADRD diagnoses. This approach ensures both clinical fidelity and alignment with the evolving AD clinical, diagnostic, and phenotyping standards (Figure 4 ). FIGURE 4 AD/ADRD phenotypes identification, refinement and validation in EHR. AD, Alzheimer's disease; ADRD, Alzheimer's disease and related dementias; EHR, electronic health record. 6.1 Capture of unrecognized dementia The Electronic health record Risk of Alzheimer's and Dementia Assessment Rule (eRADAR) 35 , 36 is a predictive algorithm designed to identify individuals at elevated risk of undiagnosed dementia using routinely collected EHR data. Unlike traditional case ascertainment methods that rely heavily on diagnostic codes, eRADAR exploits the full breadth of codified information available in EHRs. This includes demographic variables (e.g., age, sex), clinical factors (e.g., comorbid diagnoses, documented symptoms, behavioral risk factors, vital signs, physical assessments), and administrative data (e.g., healthcare utilization, missed appointments, prescription fills). By integrating these diverse inputs into a validated risk score, eRADAR provides a systematic, data‐driven approach to flag individuals who may warrant further clinical evaluation. eRADAR was explicitly developed as a case‐finding tool rather than a diagnostic instrument. Its goal is to improve sensitivity in dementia detection by capturing patients who exhibit patterns of risk that are clinically meaningful but may not yet be coded as dementia within the health record. Validation studies across large U.S. healthcare systems have demonstrated strong performance, with areas under the receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve (AUCs) ranging from 0.78 to 0.81 in internal testing and 0.79 to 0.84 in external validations. These results suggest that eRADAR is both reproducible and generalizable, supporting its use in diverse populations. 35 , 36 The incorporation of eRADAR into large‐scale data platforms offers a powerful complement to traditional phenotype‐based ascertainment, broadening surveillance to include individuals whose dementia is otherwise unrecognized in clinical coding. In this way, eRADAR functions as a second layer of classification refinement, with high potential to enhance case detection and provide a wider sweep and more complete representation of AD/ADRD in research and health system settings (Figure 4 ). 7 OVERCOMING THE LIMITS OF STRUCTURED EHRs TO HARVEST THEIR UNIQUE STRENGTHS AND OPPORTUNITIES 7.1 Use of natural language processing (NLP) We propose to use NLP for three purposes: (a) chart extraction of key missing covariates in the EHR database; (b) mild cognitive impairment (MCI) detection (often missing in EHRs owing to its subjectivity components) to assess influence as potential modifying variable; and (c) to feed the CALIBER phenotype (described above) beyond its specified requirements. Specifically, we will implement a two‐step NLP approach. Step 1: Finalize the taxonomy of MCI/AD/ADRD‐related symptoms and problems through consensus meetings with the study's clinical/informatics AD/ADRD experts to formalize a taxonomy of MCI/ADRD‐related symptoms and problems relevant for this study. We will start with the list of &gt;30 previously developed MCI/AD/ADRD‐related symptoms/problems 39 , 42 and adopt this list via consensus of study AD/ADRD experts. The final product will be a taxonomy of MCI/AD/ADRD‐related symptoms/problems to be identified with NLP. Step 2: Develop and test NLP approaches at each study site. We will develop and compare NLP approaches for extracting MCI/AD/ADRD‐related symptoms and problems in clinical notes. We will use the previous rigorous NLP software (NimbleMiner) 43 and other recent classification and information retrieval approaches (e.g., deep learning based on word embeddings BioBert/Clinical BERT) 44 to develop the NLP. At each study site, we will employ clinical experts to annotate an adequate number of clinical notes (estimated ∼1500 notes of different types at each study site, as previously done). 45 At least two clinical AD/ADRD experts will annotate each note for the presence of MCI/AD/ADRD‐related symptoms/problems, and we will discuss until full inter‐rater agreement is reached. We will apply each NLP approach to the expert annotated dataset and analyze standard performance metrics of precision, recall, and F‐score. At each site, the best‐performing approach will be used to extract MCI/AD/ADRD‐related symptoms/problems from clinical notes for cohort participants. We are confident in our ability to create accurate NLP approaches based on previous studies to develop high‐performing NLP systems. 42 , 43 , 46 , 47 The end product of NLP is a dataset of MCI‐ and AD/ADRD‐related symptoms/problems extracted for all sampled patients at each study site. 7.2 The case of missing data Data in EHR may be recorded in either structured data fields or open text fields. A common issue is that lack of data in structured variables does not always reflect true missingness (absence of assessment of relevant data) but rather lack of recording of variables that were actually measured and found as absent. Most traditional analyses are conducted on structured data and, thus, may be subject to uncertainty or even bias due to blank structured data fields. We consider this a real and frequent challenge of using EHR data for research purposes that requires addressing strategies beyond traditional approaches to deal with missing data. In this regard, we have designed and are implementing a 3‐pronged approach to missing data based on prevention (through NLP and/or AI), analytical correction and counterfactual assessment . Briefly: 7.2.1 Prevention of missing data One manner to address missingness of structured data is data augmentation by parsing through narrative text (clinical notes) recorded in EHR. This is a challenging task inherent to the features of free text such as the use of acronyms and abbreviations, technical terms, possible occurrence of typos, grammatical errors, and so forth. Computational techniques such as NLP allow the efficient parsing of text and identification and retrieval of key data or key variables that may be lacking in structured fields, as long as such data was collected and recorded in EHR. In this line, we have developed NLP algorithms that can accurately identify &gt; 30 symptoms/problems related to AD/ADRD and we have evidence that adding those NLP‐extracted factors to standardized assessments improved machine learning of AD/ADRD risk prediction in home healthcare. 39 , 42 , 43 An alternate and complementary approach is the use of Artificial Intelligence techniques, particularly generative algorithms, to construct or “allow to emerge” the key data or variables based on user‐specified prompts and unstructured textual or multimodal data. For example, NLP may facilitate or even automate the abstraction of data from clinical texts contributing to address the challenges of integrating SDoH with EHR data. There is also interest and significant potential value in investigating the capability of LLMs with zero and few‐shot learning approach to identify clinically relevant SDoHs from EHR data augmented with narrative texts (clinical notes). Furthermore, we deem it important for EHR research to maintain a pathway to new methodologies, through testing GPT‐4, Mistral‐7B‐Instruct, Llama 3‐8B‐Instruct and others in diverse clinical tasks including prognosis, phenotype building, and diagnosis extraction. Nevertheless, we are not, at this point, advocating systematic and unbridled use of LLMs for the scans of clinical notes, owing to limitations we discuss below. 7.2.2 Analytical correction of data missingness We distinguish between data missing at random (MAR) and missing not at random (MNAR). Recently developed methods can be leveraged to address these different scenarios, such as incomplete multisource feature learning (iMSF) 48 , 49 and multiple block‐wise imputation. 50 In addition, methods such as large‐scale propensity scores (LSPS) 51 are robust to block‐wise missingness, as demonstrated in previous applications to EHR data. 51 Further, multiple imputation with chained equations (MICE), 52 incorporating machine learning algorithms for flexible imputation, 53 as well as recently proposed methods which are based on graphical model results and semi‐parametric theory 54 allow to perform valid inferences even under MNAR. 7.2.3 Counterfactual impact/sensitivity analysis A complementary approach, aimed at assessing and quantifying the influence of incomplete data on inferences, is counterfactual sensitivity analysis for residual confounding 55 which quantifies remaining uncertainty in key parameter estimates by estimating analytical bounds for parameters under a range of possible confounding scenarios. Together, our 3‐pronged approach to missing data (prevention, analytical correction, counterfactual impact assessment) aims to address one of the most salient limitations of EHRs. 8 PROGRESS AND DEMONSTRATION OF FEASIBILITY 8.1 Progress in building metaplatform (1) We have tri‐institutionally completed a double iteration of our EHR databases transformation into OMOP with testing, adjustment and retesting. (2) This substantial work has enabled us to run a proof of concept for interoperability across institutions, with successful execution of standard OMOP queries. The resolution of encountered issues allowed implementing queries using centrally standardized syntax, retrieval of encounter records (Columbia = 1,887,190; U Miami = 501,762; and the U Chicago = 347,052), marking initial diagnosis of a subset of relevant conditions and assessment of interoperability of core variables such as AD, multimorbidity‐defining conditions (e.g., hypertension, diabetes), and sociodemographic (age, sex, race, ethnicity) variables. (3) We are now implementing further testing of plausibility of data distributions, a process which also entails our initial federated descriptive statistics and exploratory associations through federated regression models. This is being implemented as a three‐step approach with initial analyses focused on demonstrability of analytic results in small datasets, a second step focused on scalability toward large datasets/big data, and the third step geared toward automated fine‐tuning of data distribution plausibility events. (4) The work of NLP of clinical notes is underway with post‐docs dedicated to the task and clinicians for subsequent validation, now focused at enhanced AD/ADRD phenotypes identification, detection and refinement. We have agreed upon an algorithmic workflow for detection of explicitly coded AD/ADRD, detection of unrecognized dementia, and validation of phenotypes, and produced initial comprehensive vocabularies of standard medical terminologies, synonyms and variations with high performance and clinical validation. We are currently designing a pilot LLM comparison study to determine our best options in terms of precision, recall, processing time, ease of implementation and data governance. (5) Further, we partnered with CU‐ ADRC to complete the first (within NACC) successful linkage of EHR data, and successfully connected data with the CMS‐NIA LINKAGE program in its post–coronavirus disease 2‐19 (COVID‐19) cohort. (6) We have acquired the same state‐of‐the‐art software to de‐identify free text notes at scale, further advancing our secured, interoperability goals. 8.2 Geocoding and linkage to SDoH/census (1) We have performed geocoding of addresses in our EHRs: U Chicago has geocoded all active patients at their last known address (2.3 million patients). Geocoding, including historical addresses, is complete at Columbia; and at U Miami (1.4 million patients); all representing a painstaking but necessary step for linkage with census and other SDoH data; (2) Thus, we have initiated linkage of geocoded EHRs to social determinants databases, including to calculate Area Deprivation Index at U Chicago (relevant methodological work for measurement of longitudinal ADI is being published separately by us) and expanded on previous work by us 56 in Miami and NY 33 (3). 9 CHALLENGES, LESSONS LEARNED, AND FEASIBILITY While our work and perspective emphasize the opportunities of leveraging EHRs, federated learning, and emerging AI methods for AD/ADRD research, several important challenges must be acknowledged. FL . Although federated approaches preserve data governance and reduce reidentification risks by keeping patient‐level data within institutional firewalls, their implementation is not without obstacles. Key challenges include heterogeneity of EHR data across sites (differences in coding systems, data completeness, and supplementary datasets), technical issues related to model convergence and communication efficiency, and the risk of inadvertent information leakage from gradients or parameters. The use of a CDM, OMOP in this case, is naturally, an important step toward standardization. However, challenges remain as the nuances in data representation and coding don't automatically allow interoperability and FL. In the M3AD initiative, we have already encountered and addressed some of these challenges during OMOP harmonization and proof‐of‐concept federated queries, using significant resources in data alignment, all of which informs our recommended approach. Importantly, our federated approach offers opportunities beyond LLMs, which are unlikely to be affected by generative AI. For example, we plan to use federation for multivariate clustering and discriminating algorithms that help elucidate entangled relationships among variable groups, with the potential to discriminate across subcohorts of multimorbid patients and inform more integrated approaches to their treatment. At the same time, we recognize that clinical diagnosis is advancing and are paralleling developing new methodology to further help diagnosing AD/ ADRD. At this point, we have taken the prudent approach of not focusing on or disentangling AD subtypes, though we will retain such option in the future as EHRs are enriched. LLMs . Beyond the NLP approaches we describe above, we are naturally aware of the rapid development of methods for both efficient capture and analysis of large unstructured EHR data. We have ourselves tested the potential contribution of certain AI software (e.g., GPT‐4, Mistral‐7B‐Instruct, Llama 3‐8B‐Instruct). However, while generative models offer new possibilities for extracting knowledge from free‐text notes and addressing missing data, they also raise well‐documented concerns. For LLMs, potential privacy issues relate broadly to deployment and data‐handling practices (e.g., whether inputs/outputs or logs are retained), and the risk of hallucinations, that is, fluent statements not supported by underlying data or established evidence. These risks are typically mitigated by restricted/local deployments, minimal logging, and human verification of decision‐relevant outputs. For federated analyses, key challenges are cross‐site variable harmonization and non‐IID site differences. Nevertheless, we maintain a pathway to new methodologies throughout our efforts, which consists of evaluating and validating this rapidly evolving field . Rigor and feasibility . Importantly, our perspective is grounded in demonstrable progress rather than theoretical proposals alone. We have already harmonized EHR data to OMOP across three institutions, successfully executed interoperable queries, validated repeated measurements of key risk factors, and obtained institutional review board (IRB) approvals (under a single IRB umbrella) for tri‐institutional linkage. These milestones provide structural and functional evidence that our envisioned framework is realistic, scalable, and positioned to deliver meaningful insights into AD/ADRD and multimorbidity. 10 IMPACT AND EXPECTED CONTRIBUTIONS M3AD‐MAP integrates harmonized validated, longitudinal clinical data from a three‐city multiethnic EHR consortium embedded in neighborhood‐level social determinants of health, enabling secure, high‐resolution analyses of both pre‐ and within AD/ADRD trajectories throughout real‐world multimorbidity contexts. Specifically: Better tailoring of risk prediction and individualized prevention : Enabling harmonized simulations to understand disease, trajectories, incidence, and progression within the context of multimorbidity. Does order of morbidities prior to or within AD/ADRD diagnosis matter? Do types of treatments or real‐world modifications of risk factors matter? Are there windows of opportunities for intervention that may not have been visible either in smaller samples or without the complexity included? What is the real‐life impact of the trajectories of these risk factors , that is, control versus uncontrolled, discordant intermittent control of hypertension or diabetes? when one either intermittently stops smoking, or controls hypertension? or both? For how long? Are there thresholds? Does the sequencing or order of initiation and control of these risk factors matter, that is, is there a hierarchy? How does the interplay of patient complexity and complexity of care influence incidence, timing and progression of AD/ADRD? Such research will better tailor risk prediction, enable individualized prevention, and improve clinical outcomes and management of AD/ADRD patients in their layered complexity. M3AD will also address causality in looking not just at prediction but at impact of these complexities on AD/ADRD through novel analytical methods. Emulated trials that examine the effects of modifying risk factors, such as smoking cessation, weight management, and blood pressure or glycemic control, providing real‐world valuable insights into preventive strategies for AD/ADRD in individuals with multimorbidity. For example, observational studies 57 have shown that smoking cessation is associated with a reduced risk of AD/ADRD while maintaining optimal BMI and blood pressure levels through midlife can mitigate later cognitive decline. 58 , 59 These hypotheses can now be rigorously tested in real‐life data. Real‐world treatment evaluation : Assessing the impact of current or future therapies across the population in pre‐, during, and post‐treatment phases. Timing of the M3AD platform is opportune as it allows us to straddle the period of fast improving and expanding diagnostics, biomarkers as well as treatments for AD/ADRD as they are rolled out in clinical care and EHRs, beyond clinical trials. Hypothesis testing : Rapid testing and validation of hypotheses, treatments, and biomarkers identified in the literature or through collaborations with the larger AD/ADRD scientific and stakeholders’ community. Recruitment in clinical trials: greatly facilitated and with the additional advantage of having a recorded trajectory of patients prior to their recruitment to measure inflection in sought risk factors and outcomes. A living, evolving platform : Regular updates ensure ongoing relevance, allowing for real‐time evaluations and fast‐tracked development of potential interventions. Our design allows for continuous prospective enrollment in our consortium with no right‐censoring. Access to a larger group of investigators , in gradated privacy‐preserving mechanisms as well as sharing of methods and scalability. 10.1 A logical next step and partner complementing NACC/ADRC and other networks Over the past 20+ years, the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC) has developed and maintained one of the largest, most comprehensive, and oldest Alzheimer's disease datasets, built in partnership with over diverse ADRCs nationwide. The NACC database provides invaluable resources for the diagnosis and classification of Alzheimer's patients and consists of three primary data sets: (a) the Uniform Data Set (UDS)‐ using longitudinal standardized clinical evaluations, with neuropsychological testing scores, clinical diagnoses, and APOE genotyping, and modules, (b) The Neuropathology Data Set (NP)‐ Standardized neuropathological data collected from subset of participants who have undergone an autopsy, and (c) The Minimum Data Set (MDS) – A retrospectively collected cross‐sectional dataset for ADRC participants prior to the introduction of the UDS in 2005. While ADRCs provide high‐quality, standardized, and clinically detailed datasets, they are admittedly limited by selection biases, smaller sample sizes, lack of uniform criteria across sites, and clinic‐based recruitment protocols that are not representative of the broader population. However, and importantly, ADRCs and NACC may contribute to phenotype validation of larger EHRs data , together with other overlapping cohorts, as we purport to do here in collaboration. The combination of M3AD and ADRCs as validation provides for breadth and depth. Our unique targeted and census‐embedded infrastructure with curated, harmonized, validated, analysis‐ready data, upgradable in near real‐time (including potential addition of wearables data, moving forward), will be invaluable for chronic disease targeted prevention, prediction, intervention and impact through the life course. This singular granularity will also be cross‐fertilizing with other networks (AoU, N3C, PCORNET, TriNetX, Sentinel) and NACC. In addition, this new generation of EHR‐based harmonized research platforms for the study of AD/ADRD, of which M3AD is an early, systematic, comprehensive, and scalable instance, has the potential to enable Deep Phenotyping, and deal with precise and fine granular variables contained in clinical data. CONSENT STATEMENT Approval from the single IRB of record for this consortium stands with the Human Research Protection Office, Institutional Review Boards, Columbia University (IRB‐AAAV4935). CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT Julie Johnson discloses that she has received financial support from MDClone to attend professional meetings and conferences from 2023 to the present. Samuel Volchenboum discloses being Cofounder of Litmus Health; consulting roles with Belay Diagnostics and CVS Accordant. The remaining authors declare that they have no competing interests. Author disclosures are available in the supporting information . Supporting information Supporting Information