Vascular risk factors, alcohol intake, and cognitive decline

Since the therapeutic options currently available have demonstrated limited efficacy, the search for preventive strategies for cognitive decline and dementia is mandatory. A possible role of vascular and lifestyle-related factors was recently proposed for age-related changes of cognitive function, predementia syndromes, and cognitive decline of degenerative (Alzheimer's disease, AD) or vascular origin. At present, cumulative evidence suggested that vascular risk factors may be important in the development of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), dementia, and AD. Among vascular-related factors, metabolic syndrome has been associated with the risk of cognitive decline and overall dementia. Moderate alcohol drinking has been proposed as a protective factor against MCI and dementia in several longitudinal studies, but contrasting findings also exist. However, in most cases, these were only observational studies, and results are awaited from large multicenter randomized clinical trials in older persons. At present, vascular risk factor management, lifestyle changes, and drugs could be employed together to delay the onset of dementia syndromes.

Introduction At present, there is no curative treatment for dementia and Alzheimer’s disease (AD), or therapeutical approach to prevent the conversion of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to dementia. In the past years, extensive research has increased our knowledge of the aetiology of AD, other dementing disorders, and predementia syndromes and several hypotheses have already emerged from the epidemiological research. Epidemiological evidence supported the hypothesis that modifiable vascular and lifestyle-related factors are associated to the development of dementia and predementia syndromes in late life, opening new avenues for the prevention of these diseases ( 1 ). The aim of this article was to examine the possible role of vascular and lifestyle-related factors in cognitive decline, reviewing current epidemiological evidence with a focus on the findings from the Italian Longitudinal Study on Aging (ILSA), a large, population-based, prospective study with a sample of 5,632 subjects 65-84 years old, independent or institutionalized, randomly selected from the demographic rolls of eight Italian municipalities after stratification for age and gender ( 2 ). Special attention was paid to the possible role of metabolic syndrome (MetS) and alcohol consumption in predementia and dementia syndromes. Vascular risk factors, metabolic syndromes, and cognitive decline In older subjects, particularly over age 85 years, the prevalence of vascular factors and other medical conditions that impair cognition increases substantially including chronic cardiovascular, respiratory, and metabolic diseases, and severe sensory deficits ( 3 ). Evidence of overlap between degenerative and vascular disorders is emerging from pathologic and epidemiological studies. Various genetic and non genetic factors known to increase the risk of vascular disease, including apolipoprotein E (APOE) and angiotensin I converting enzyme 1 (ACE1) genotypes, total cholesterol, lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)], diabetes mellitus, atrial fibrillation, hypertension, obesity, serum APOE levels, and C-reactive protein levels an inflammation, have been evaluated as risk factors for AD and VaD, and cognitive decline ( 4 ). Recent evidence from population-based studies and case series suggests that cerebrovascular disease (CVD) and vascular risk factors may contribute to the heterogeneity of MCI ( 2 , 3 , 5. , 6. , 7. ). Because such vascular risk factors may be modifiable, identification and subsequent management of these possible risk factors may help to prevent, and reduce conversion rates of MCI to dementia ( 3 ). Apart from the association between AD and vascular risk factors, dietary fatty acids appeared to have a role in predementia and dementia syndromes ( 8 , 9 ). Recently, based on the data from Cardiovascular Risk Factors, Ageing and Incidence of Dementia (CAIDE) study, a risk score including easily measurable variables associated with the risk of dementia later in life has recently developed ( 10 ). The CAIDE Dementia Risk Score has already been validated in a large population (N=9831) and provides a quantitative estimation of the probability of becoming demented, but it cannot definitely state whether a person will develop dementia. Among the variables associated with the risk of dementia later in life, we found some vascular factors [blood pressure, body mass index (BMI), and total cholesterol] and some lifestyle-related factors (education and physical activity). It should therefore be used mainly to target preventive measures to those most at risk and not to label individuals as being demented or non-demented in the future (11). MetS is defined as a cluster of abdominal obesity, impaired fasting glucose, hypertension, low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and/or high triglycerides, firstly described about 40 years ago ( 12 , 13 ). Most of the MetS components have been shown to be independent risk factors for coronary artery disease (CAD) and stroke, and MetS itself was already evidenced to be an independent risk factor for CAD, CAD mortality, and fatal and non-fatal stroke ( 14. , 15. , 16. ). In particular, MetS increases the risk of both clinical stroke and silent brain infarction by 2–4 times ( 15 , 16 ). As seen above, several individual components of MetS have been linked to risk of developing dementia and MCI ( 2 , 3 , 17 ). However, few studies have looked at the components of MetS as a whole. MetS has also been previously shown to increase the risk of cognitive decline in different ethnic groups ( 18. , 19. , 20. , 21. ), overall dementia ( 22 ), AD in both population-based and case-control studies ( 23 , 24 ), and frontal-subcortical syndrome ( 25 ). However, the association between MetS and accelerated cognitive decline seems to disappear at the age 85 and older ( 26 ). Recent findings from the ILSA suggested that the prevalence of MetS according to the criteria of the Third Adults Treatment Panel of the National Cholesterol Education Program (ATP-III) was around 31.5% in men, and 59.8% in women among the Italian elderly ( 27 ). Although, there were evidence of a link between MetS and VaD from the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study (HAAS) ( 22 ) and Brazilian community-dwelling elderly ( 25 ), these studies did not use standard criteria for MetS and VaD. In fact, in the HAAS a clustering of 7 metabolic cardiovascular risk factors (random postload glucose, diastolic and systolic blood pressures, BMI, subscapular skinfold thickness, random triglycerides, and total cholesterol) increases the risk of dementia, and in particular for VaD, but not for AD ( 22 ). However, this clustering of cardiovascular risk factors did not identifies a MetS diagnosis according to current criteria. More recently, in Brazilian community-dwelling elderly, frontal-subcortical syndrome was strongly associated with MetS diagnosed adapting ATP III criteria, independently of age, gender or presence of stroke ( 25 ). In this recent study, Met.S was also significantly associated with lower cognitive, executive, and neuromotor functions, and depressive symptoms ( 25 ). However, at present, there is no clear consensus in the diagnosis of frontal-subcortical syndrome, arbitrary defined by presence of at least one frontal release reflex plus presence of three or more of the following four criteria: cognitive impairment, late-onset depression, lower limbs neuromotor dysfunction, and urgency incontinence ( 28 ). It is also unclear whether the MetS has a higher predictive value for developing dementia than the sum of its individual components ( 17 ). The mechanisms of vascular factors in the development of dementia syndromes are still under investigation. Nonetheless, vascular risk factors may directly induce Alzheimer’s pathology, or lead to arteriosclerosis, impaired brain blood flow and metabolism, and neuronal dysfunction. Vascular risk factors may also induce small and large vessel CVD and infarcts, leading to an increased risk of development of clinically overt AD ( 10 ). Alcohol consumption and cognitive decline Among lifestyle factors related to diet, several studies have assessed alcohol consumption and cognitive function among older adults, but with inconsistent results ( 1 ) ( Table 1 ). Launer and colleagues showed in the Zutphen Elderly Study that men with CAD or diabetes and low-to-moderate alcohol intake had a significantly lower risk of poor cognitive function compared to abstainers ( 29 ). In the Framingham Heart Study the association between alcohol consumption and cognitive performance was analyzed separately for men and women, since the researchers expected a different alcohol-cognition relationship for male and female drinkers ( 30 ). Some have claimed there is a J or U s haped relation between alcohol drinking and cognitive impairment ( 29 , 31 , 32 ); that is, light to moderate alcohol drinking might have a protective effect compared with total abstention and heavy drinking. Table 1 Principal studies on the relationships among alcohol consumption and dementia, vascular dementia (VaD), Alzheimer’s disease (AD), and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) Reference Setting and study design Subjects Methods Results and conclusions Launer et al., 1996 (29) Cross-sectional and longitudinal, population-based (3 years) 489 men aged 69-89 years MMSE, evaluation of alcohol intake and smoking habits After adjustment for age, education, and smoking status, men with CVDZdiabetes and low-to-moderate alcohol intake had a significantly lower risk for poor cognitive function than abstainers. Alcohol intake was not associated with cognitive decline Orgogozo et al. 1997 (33) Longitudinal, population-based (3 years) 3777 subjects aged 65 and over Diagnosis of dementia and AD; evaluation of alcohol intake In the 318 moderate drinkers, as compared to the 971 non-drinkers, and after adjusting for possible confounders, the odds ratios were respectively 0.19 for incident dementia and 0.28 for AD. Among the 922 mild drinkers respect to the abstainers the relative risk for AD was reduced significantly Elias et al. 1999 (30) Cross-sectional and longitudinal, population-based (24 years) 1786 subjects aged 55-88 years Eight cognitive tests of verbal memory, learning, visual organization and memory, attention, abstract reasoning, and concept formation; evaluation of weekly alcohol intake Women who drank moderately (2-4 drinksZday) showed superior performance in many cognitive domains relative to abstainers. For men, superior performance was found within the range of 4-8 drinksZday, although fewer significant relations were observed. These results were confirmed by prospective analyses of 24-year drinking history Ruitenberg et al., 2002 (34) Longitudinal, population-based study (6 years) 5,395 subjects aged 55 and older Diagnosis of AD, VaD, or other dementia; evaluation of alcohol intake Light-to-moderate drinking (one to three drinks per day) was significantly associated with a lower risk of any dementia and VaD. No evidence that the relation between alcohol and dementia varied by type of alcoholic beverage was found Mukamal et al., 2003 (35) Nested case-control of a longitudinal, population-based study 373 cases with incident dementia and 373 controls Diagnosis of incident dementia (AD and VaD), average alcohol consumption, and magnetic resonance imaging findings Compared with abstention, consumption of 1 to 6 drinks weekly is associated with a lower risk of incident dementia among older adults. A trend toward greater odds of dementia associated with heavier alcohol consumption was most apparent among men and participants with an APOE e4 allele, with similar relationships of alcohol use with AD and VaD Luchsinger et al., 2004 (38) Longitudinal, population-based study (4 years) 908 subjects aged 65 years and older Diagnosis of incident dementia (AD and dementia associated with stroke) and alcohol intake After adjusting for age, sex, APOE e4 status, education, and other alcoholic beverages, only intake of up to three daily servings of wine was associated with a lower risk of AD. Stratified analyses by the APOE-epsilon 4 allele revealed that the association between wine consumption and lower risk of AD was confined to subjects without the APOE e4 allele Anttilaetal., 2004 (41) Longitudinal, population-based study (23 years) 1464 men and women aged 65-79 years Diagnosis of incident dementia and MCI, and subjects classified as those who never drank alcohol, those who drank “infrequently” (less than once a month), and those who drank “frequently” (several times a month) Alcohol drinking in middle age showed a U shaped relation with risk of MCI in old age. Only the carriers of APOE e4 had an increased risk of dementia with increasing alcohol consumption Espeland et al., 2005 (42) Longitudinal, population-based study (4.2 years) 4,451 community-dwelling women aged 65-79 years Diagnosis of incident MCI and dementia, and annual modified Mini-Mental State Examination. Subjects classified as abstainers, &lt; 1 drinkZday, and &gt; 1 chink day Moderate alcohol intake was associated with an approximately 50 percent reduced risk of combined probable dementia and/or MCI. Significant decline in global cognition was less common among women who reported alcohol intake at baseline, also after adjustment for both demographicZsocial and clinical factors Solfrizzi et al., 2007 (40) Melhig étal, 2007 (39) Longitudinal, population-based study (3.5 years) Longitudinal, population-based study (34 years) 1,445 men and women aged 65-84 years 1,462 women aged 38-60 years Diagnosis of incident MCI and progression from MCI to dementia; subjects classified as abstainers, &lt; 1 drinkZday, 1-2 drinkZday, and &gt; 2 drinkZday Diagnosis of dementia; evaluation of alcohol intake In patients with MCI up to 1 drinkZday of alcohol or wine may decrease the rate of progression to dementia. No significant associations were found between any levels of drinking and the incidence of MCI in non-cognitively impaired individuals vs abstainers Wine was protective for dementia, and the association was strongest among women who consumed wine only. In contrast, consumption of spirits at baseline was associated with slightly increased risk of dementia MMSE: Mini-mental State Examination; CVD: cerebrovascular disease; AD: APOE: apolipoprotein E Moreover, epidemiological studies have recently reported an association between wine consumption and the incidence of AD. Particularly, red wine was investigated in the PAQUID study, in which the relative risk for dementia and AD among 318 subjects who drank three or four glasses of wine each day in comparison with 971 total abstainers were 0.21 and 0.25, respectively. Among the 922 older subjects who drank no more than one or two glasses of wine each day respect to the abstainers the relative risk for AD was reduced significantly (0. 55) ( 33 ). More recently, the relation between alcohol consumption and risk of dementia (AD, VaD, or other dementia) was examined in the Rotterdam Study. The findings of this study, with an average follow-up of 6 years, suggested that light-to-moderate alcohol consumption is associated with a reduced risk of dementia in individuals aged 55 years or older; this effect seems to be unchanged by the source of alcohol ( 34 ) ( Table 1 ). In the Rotterdam study, the protective effect of alcohol drinking was found mainly for VaD, and the authors suggested that moderate alcohol intake might protect against dementia via a reduction in vascular risk factors ( 34 ). In a nested case-control study on 373 cases with incident dementia and 373 controls who were among 5,888 adults aged 65 years and older, and participated in the Cardiovascular Health Study (CHS), the adjusted odds ratio for dementia among whose weekly alcohol consumption was less than 1 drink were 0.65, compared with abstention; 1 to 6 drinks, 0.46; 7 to 13 drinks, 0.69; and 14 or more drinks ( 35 ). In the Copenhagen City Heart Study, the risk of developing dementia was significantly lower among occasional wine drinkers, in weekly drinkers and, but not significantly, in daily drinkers. An increased risk for beer and for spirits was found in occasional, weekly, and daily drinkers ( 36 ). A trend toward greater odds for dementia associated with heavier alcohol consumption was most apparent among men and participants bearing an APOE e4 allele, with similar relationships of alcohol use with AD and VaD ( 35 ). The findings from the CHS were consistent with the PAQUID Study ( 33 ) and the Rotterdam Study ( 34 ), but suggested a higher risk of dementia with consumption greater than 2 drinks per day. The results of the CHS were also consistent with those of the Epidemiology of Vascular Aging Study which found that alcohol intake was associated with a lower risk of cognitive deterioration among subjects without an APOE ε4 allele, but a higher risk in APOE e 4 carriers ( 37 ). Surprisingly, the Rotterdam Study found that the lower risk of dementia associated with alcohol use was more consistent among individuals with an APOE e4 allele ( 34 ), but no significant interaction was detected. In the Washington Heights Inwood-Columbia Aging Project, with 908 subjects aged 65 years and older, consumption of up to three servings of wine daily is associated with a lower risk of AD in elderly individuals without the APOE e4 allele ( 38 ). Finally, in the Prospective Population Study of Women in Goteborg, Sweden, in a 34-year follow-up, wine was protective for dementia, and the association was strongest among women who consumed wine only. In contrast, consumption of spirits at baseline was associated with slightly increased risk of dementia (39) ( Table 1 ). Very recently, we evaluated the impact of alcohol consumption on the incidence of MCI in 1,445 non-cognitively impaired individuals and on its progression to dementia in 121 patients with MCI, aged 65 to 84 years, participating in the ILSA, with a 3.5-year follow-up. Patients with MCI who consumed up to 1 drink/day had a reduction in the rate of progression to dementia in comparison with patients with MCI who never consumed alcohol. Overall, vs non-drinkers, patients with MCI who consumed 1.0 to 14.9 g of alcohol/day, derived mostly from wine, had a decrease in the rate of progression to dementia of about 85 percent. Moderate intake of alcohol deriving from wine, in drinks controlled for the intake of alcohol deriving from other sources within each level of total intake, was also associated with a significantly lower rate of progression to dementia. No significant associations were found between any levels of drinking and the incidence of MCI in non-cognitively impaired individuals vs abstainers ( 40 ). To the best of our knowledge, only two other studies have examined the effect of alcohol consumption on the risk for the incidence of MCI ( 41 , 42 ) ( Table 1 ). After an average follow-up of 23 years, non-drinkers and frequent drinkers were both more than twice as likely to have MCI in old age than occasional drinkers ( 41 ). However, the APOE genotype seemed to modify the relationship, such that the risk of old age dementia increased with increasing midlife alcohol consumption only among carriers of the APOE e4 allele ( 41 ). In our report on ILSA sample, we failed to confirm these findings, but we note that the alcohol consumption reported was a midlife determination ( 39 ). Probably, a follow-up period longer than 3.5 years would have revealed that a moderate alcohol consumption might influence the incidence of MCI. On the other hand, our findings are consistent with those obtained in the Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study with a 4.2 year-follow-up, which found that moderate alcohol intake was associated with an approximately 50 percent reduced risk of combined probable dementia and MCI ( 42 ). However, after adjusting for demographic and socioeconomic factors, and baseline Modified Mini Mental State Examination (3MSE), the significance disappeared ( 42 ). Currently, ours is the first study in which alcohol consumption was associated with the rate of pro progression of MCI to dementia, in fact, up to 1 drink/day of alcohol or wine may decrease the rate of progression to dementia in patients with MCI ( 38 ). It is also possible that moderate lifestyles in general, which obviously vary according to different cultural environments, protect from cognitive impairment. Thus, it may not be the direct effect of alcohol or specific substances in alcoholic drinks that provide the protection, but moderate alcohol drinking may be an indicator of a complex set of favorable social and lifestyle factors. A protective effect of alcohol on cognitive function in moderate drinkers may be due to a relatively poor health status among abstainers or because cognitive status influences alcohol consumption and overall health status. The mechanism by which low alcohol intake could be protective against the progression of MCI to dementia or against dementia syndromes is, at present, unknown. Alcohol consumption might protect from dementia by effects on the cerebral vasculature, supporting the observation that moderate alcohol intake might be protective against ischemic stroke ( 43 ). In fact, a light-to-moderate alcohol use is associated with a lower prevalence of MRI-defined white matter lesions and sub-clinical infarcts ( 44 ), although MRI abnormalities, HDL cholesterol levels, and fibrinogen levels only marginally influenced the association of alcohol consumption and dementia in the CHS ( 35 ). Furthermore, light-to-moderate alcohol intake has been reported to be associated with a lower prevalence of vascular brain findings and, in APOE e4 carriers, with hippocampal and amygdalar atrophy as assessed by MRI ( 44 ). Experimental studies found than ethanol initially increases hippocampal acetylcholine release, which could conceivably improve memory performance ( 1 ). Moderate doses of alcohol may increase prostacyclin concentrations, reduce the generation of thromboxane A2, and inhibit platelet function ( 1 ). It is also known that alcohol is associated with increased levels of HDL cholesterol, its subfractions HDL2 and HDL3, and its associated apolipoproteins A-I and A-II ( 45 , 46 ). The association with HDL cholesterol is deemed to account for up to a half of the reduction in coronary events associated with moderate alcohol consumption ( 1 ). Wine consumption may exert a protective effect, either through alcohol intake itself, through the antioxidant effects of polyphenols richly represented in red wine ( 47 , 48 ), or through both. The latter effects, of course, are independent of alcohol and, in fact, have been also associated with alcohol-free red wine ( 49 ). Processes that originate, modulate, or precipitate the deposition of amyloid beta in the brain, such as oxidative stress, rather than vascular processes, may better explain the development of AD, and the vascular effects of the alcohol component of alcoholic beverages may not be enough to explain the protective effects of the moderate intake of alcohol from dementia. The presence in wine of nonalcoholic components, such as particular antioxidants, could explain a differential effect of wine on the progression to dementia. In fact, liquor has been shown to have less antioxidant activity than wine ( 50 ). Conclusions Drugs currently used in the treatment of cognitive impairment and dementia have a very limited therapeutic value, overall on the management of psychiatric and behavioural symptoms, rather than cognitive symptoms. It results evident the necessity to potentially individualize new strategies able to prevent and to slow down the progression of predementia and dementia syndromes. In the past few years, vascular and lifestyle-related factors for predementia and dementia syndromes have been an area of intensive research. At present, cumulative evidence suggested the vascular risk factors may be important in the development of MCI, dementia, and AD. Also, MetS, defined as a cluster of vascular risk factors, appeared to be a possible, independent risk factor for cognitive decline and dementia. Moderate alcohol drinking has been proposed as a protective factor against MCI and dementia in several longitudinal studies, but contrasting findings also exist. In fact, many of these studies were limited by cross-sectional design, restriction by age or sex, or incomplete ascertainment. Whether, the divergent findings can be explained by the drinking patterns has not been extensively investigated. At present, there is no evidence indicating that starting to drink at a later age would be beneficial. It thus seems that from an epidemiologic point of view, the way to curb the dementia epidemic is through strict attention to vascular risk factors. In fact, several studies have confirmed that good control of hypertension can prevent dementia (both AD and VaD) and treatment with statins also has the same effect ( 51 ). Obviously, even rigid attention to these risk factors will not be able to prevent dementia altogether. For one, the most important vascular risk factor is probably age, which still cannot be manipulated. Secondly, the data concerning the reduction of the incidence of dementia should better be interpreted as delay in the onset rather than prevention. However, because the prevalence of dementia doubles every 5 years, delay in the onset of dementia by five years is equivalent to a reduction of the prevalence by half in any given age group ( 52 ). Probably, at present, since several important factors are already identified, vascular risk factor management, lifestyle changes, and drugs should be employed together to delay the onset of dementia syndromes.