Multimodal framework for the joint analysis of single-cell RNA and T cell receptor sequencing data predicts T cell response to cancer immunotherapy

T cell states are prognostic in different cancer types. Recent technologies enable joint profiling of T cell RNA and T cell receptor (TCR) sequences at single-cell resolution. Here we present the TCR-RNA Integrating Model (TRIM), a multi-modal variational autoencoder framework that integrates RNA-TCR data and predicts T cell clonality and transcriptional states. TRIM learns a shared representation of the data conditioned on patient, tissue source, and treatment timepoint. We applied TRIM to three independent datasets that included T cells collected before and after checkpoint inhibitor treatment, sourced either from blood and tumor biopsies in patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and colorectal cancer, or from tumor and adjacent tissue in a pan-cancer dataset. In all settings, TRIM accurately predicted intra-tumor T cell clonal expansion and transcriptional status based on T cells from blood or normal tissue before treatment, demonstrating its utility in modeling multimodal T cell data and predicting T cell response to treatment and disease progression.

Introduction T cells play a defining role in the adaptive immune response, and understanding and modulating their activities has become a central focus in immunotherapy 1 , 2 . The reactivity of a T cell is determined by its unique T cell receptor (TCR), which can specifically recognize foreign antigens presented by cell surface MHC molecules on antigen-presenting cells 3 , 4 . In presence of cancer, circulating naïve T cells are activated in tumor-draining lymph nodes, enabling migration into tumors 5 . A naïve T cell becomes activated when it recognizes a cancer antigen through its TCR and then undergoes clonal expansion and differentiation either into an effector T cell that kills the cancer cells or a memory T cell that protects during additional encounters with the same cancer 6 . Cancer cells acquire many mechanisms to evade the T cell response 7 . This observation has spurred major immunotherapy developments – including immune-checkpoint blockade, adoptive T cell therapy, and cancer vaccines– all designed to restore the T cell response 8 . To develop more effective cancer immunotherapies, we need a multifaceted understanding of the T cell response that accounts for the response being both highly dynamic and coordinated across multiple tissue sites. The advent of single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) has greatly enhanced the resolution of T cell subsets, revealing the underlying heterogeneity in transcriptional states, especially in tumors, with variation between patients and across tumor types. Despite this heterogeneity, recent pan-cancer transcriptomic atlases profiling tumor-infiltrating T cells across tumor types have identified shared T cell states and developmental pathways. Signals from the cancer microenvironment often drive the T cells towards an exhausted state characterized by increased expression of T cell inhibitory receptors (e.g., PD1, CTLA4, LAG3), loss of effector killing function, reduced cytokine secretion, and ultimately tumor immune evasion 9 – 13 . A recurring theme is that patients who do not successfully respond to cancer immunotherapy often have tumor-infiltrating T cells in an exhausted state 14 , indicating that T cell states are an important predictive biomarker. While transcriptomics is powerful for identifying T cell states, the sequence of the TCR is ultimately what drives cancer antigen recognition and a protective immune response. Single-cell TCR sequencing (scTCRseq) determines both the TCR α -chain and β -chain sequences constituting the TCR and allows us to define clonality in a population of T cells, identifying T cell clones with the same TCR that have expanded in response to an antigen from clones that have not expanded 15 , 16 . When paired with scRNAseq from the same cell, this provides a powerful link between a T cell clonotype and its cell state, which has resulted in many insights into the activities of expanded T cell clones. For instance, in a study of glioma-infiltrating T cells, analysis of clonally expanded T cells identified a novel subset expressing the inhibitory receptor KLRB1, which when blocked resulted in enhanced killing of glioma cells 17 . The TCR sequence not only reports the T cell clonotype but also can act as a molecular barcode to trace T cells across time and in different tissue sites 18 . For example, in a clinical trial of neoadjuvant immune-checkpoint blockade in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC), both tumor-infiltrating T cells and peripheral blood T cells were concurrently collected before and after treatment 19 . Joint, multimodal analyses of TCR sequences and T cell transcriptomes identified CD8 + T cells that were clonally expanded during therapy, had pre-existed in the tumor prior to treatment, expressed tissue-resident memory and cytotoxicity programs, and whose clonotypes could be detected systemically in the blood. Multimodal profiling of the immune system during disease treatment and across tissue sites enables the discovery of clinical biomarkers predictive of patient prognosis and immunotherapy response. A promising approach is to link measurements in the peripheral blood to measurements in the tumor tissue, as blood collection is clinically routine and can be repeatedly performed over the course of patient treatment 20 . For example, FDA-approved Epi proColon analyzes blood samples for Septin 9 methylated DNA shed from tumors as a biomarker for colorectal cancer 21 . Similarly, peripheral immune cells can also serve as cancer biomarkers. Multiple peripheral T cell biomarkers have been identified to date, including a link between peripheral and intratumoral clonal expansion in response to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 immunotherapy, early peripheral T cell proliferation predicting response to immune-checkpoint blockade, and cell surface markers NKG2D, CD39, and CX3CR1 in peripheral T cells, identifying tumor-infiltrating T cells in melanoma 22 – 24 . These recent discoveries in the predictive capacity of peripheral blood towards tumor dynamics underscore the great need for multimodal data integration and translation. Different data modalities, including tabular, text, and images, are routinely profiled in cells and tissues, and their integration provides insight by unifying multiple biological perspectives 25 , 26 . However, very few multimodal studies collecting immune samples longitudinally over cancer treatment and across multiple tissue sites have been performed, as they are costly, challenging in the clinical setting, and require novel, integrative analyses 19 , 27 , 28 . Integrating datasets across different modalities is complicated by technical variability and the unique features of each modality. In the single-cell context, the heterogeneity of multiple complex distributions provides challenges but also opportunities for this type of analysis 29 – 31 . For instance, several methods, including CoNGA, tessa, and mvTCR, integrate jointly measured transcriptomes and TCR sequences from single cells 32 – 34 . Furthermore, an increasing number of methods allow translation from one modality to another 35 , for example predicting scRNAseq data in CD4+ T cells from paired chromatin accessibility of the cells 29 . Many of these methods are built on variational autoencoders (VAEs), effective neural network architectures for multi-modal integration that afford great flexibility in modeling different data distributions and integrating them into a shared representation 36 , 37 . However, to our knowledge, there are no multimodal models for T cells that can predict tumor response from peripheral blood measurements alone. We introduce a multimodal data integration method that models paired scRNAseq and scTCRseq measured at multiple time points and across multiple tissue sites (Fig. 1 a). By integrating these two data modalities through a VAE architecture, we can elucidate the relationship between the transcriptome and clonality of T cells and identify functionally related T cell subsets (Fig. 1 b). Our TCR-RNA integrating model (TRIM) not only integrates these two modalities but can also generate predictions for an unmeasured time point or tissue site. We test TRIM on an extensively profiled clinical cohort of HNSCC patients receiving immune-checkpoint blockade therapy, with paired scRNAseq and scTCRseq measurements from the tumor and peripheral blood pre- and post-treatment 19 . We also tested TRIM on a similar dataset containing paired single-cell RNA-seq and TCR-seq data from colorectal cancer (CRC) patients 27 , and a paired RNA and TCR pan-cancer dataset collected from tumor and adjacent tissue 11 , demonstrating our model generalizes beyond the datasets on which it was developed. Our framework accurately predicts how tumor-infiltrating T cells change after treatment by analyzing only peripheral blood T cells before treatment. We expect TRIM to be a powerful modeling framework in clinical cohorts, where profiling all tissues of interest at every time point is challenging, as well as in the discovery of biomarkers for tumor prognosis and treatment response. Fig. 1 Model framework. a TRIM is trained on paired single-cell RNA/TCR sequencing data on T cells collected from two different sources (blood and tumor) and at two different time points (pre- and post-treatment), and it can make predictions on unseen samples. It is not necessary to have matching samples for all four conditions; some samples may not be available for all patients. b Based on single-cell RNA and TCR sequencing data on the more easily accessible T cells in each patient’s blood pre-treatment, TRIM can predict the intra-tumor and post-treatment T cell distributions. Graphic elements in both ( a and b ) were created in BioRender. Ashenberg, O. (2026) https://BioRender.com/7wqkb8n . Results TRIM uses a conditional variational autoencoder to predict treatment effect in tumor from pre-treatment blood To integrate information from RNA and TCR sequences in T cells and make predictions about T cell states at unseen tissue sites and time points, we propose TRIM, a generative model based on a conditional VAE (Fig. 1 b, Methods: TRIM). TRIM is trained on paired single-cell RNA and TCR sequencing data from T cells in circulating blood before treatment, and it then predicts the state of the T cell population at the single-cell level in both pre- and post-treatment tumors, as well as in post-treatment blood samples (Fig. 1 b). TRIM learns a joint representation of gene expression and clonality by using two separate encoders to map the RNA profile and the TCR sequence of a cell into a joint latent space, conditioned on the source (blood or tumor), timepoint (pre-treatment or post-treatment), and patient. To ensure that the joint latent space captures information from both the cell’s RNA profile and its TCR sequence, TRIM uses two separate decoders to reconstruct the two modalities (Fig. 2 a). Fig. 2 Model architecture. a The training process takes as input the RNA and the learned TCR convolutional autoencoder (CNN) representations (bottom left), along with condition IDs. After learning the embedding vectors for the conditions using our condition-learning process, with condition ID as a key to group features (bottom right, Methods), the encoders map them into the latent space, as in a variational autoencoder. The latent points are then combined with learned condition embedding vectors, decoded, and optimized using the typical VAE losses as well as an additional TCR contrastive loss. b In the evaluation phase, the model samples random latent points from a standard normal distribution and decodes them with the trained decoder networks. The continuous decoded TCRs are discretized to obtain pseudoclones. When multiple paired modalities are present, traditional autoencoders minimize the error when translating between modalities using the encoder of one and the decoder of the other. This strategy has been effective in integrating various single-cell modalities, such as RNA-seq, ATAC-seq, and chromatin imaging 35 , 38 , 39 . A reconstruction loss is applied to encourage the output to be close to the original points. For the RNA space, this loss is calculated using the L 2 norm (Methods). The TCR representations used in our model are derived from embeddings learned through a convolutional autoencoder, which we train as a pre-processing step. Specifically, each TCR is represented by the CDR3 amino acid sequence of its β chain, encoded as a null-padded sequence where each amino acid is represented by its Atchley factors—biochemically informed numerical descriptors that capture properties such as polarity, charge, and hydrophobicity 40 (Methods). We extract the embeddings from the middle latent layer of the trained convolutional autoencoder to serve as input to the TRIM model. Despite focusing on the highly variable CDR3 sequence of the TCRs β chain, the model implicitly learns the contributing V and J gene segments, resulting in a learned representation space organized in a biologically meaningful manner (Supplementary Fig. 1 ). We focus on the β chain for practical and biological reasons. First, in single-cell V(D)J sequencing, α - β pairing is often incomplete. In blood samples profiled in ref. 19 , 87% of cells have paired chains, with β recovered more frequently than α (95% vs. 89%). More broadly, large public TCR resources are predominantly β -only, with 94% of sequences containing only the β chain 41 . Second, prior studies that include both chains report only marginal performance gains, likely because the CDR3 β sequence is the dominant determinant of peptide-MHC specificity 42 , 43 . Given these experimental constraints and data availability, we use the β chain to maximize sample coverage while retaining most of the relevant signal. We also observe that RNA-seq profiles contain limited information about a cell’s TCR sequence beyond its clonality (as we will discuss in more detail later), a direct translation between TCR and RNA is not possible. To address this limitation, we model T cell clonality rather than TCR sequences. To preserve local structure in the TCR space without penalizing unrelated variations, we introduce the contrastive clonality loss . This loss encourages T cells from the same clone to be close together in the latent space while ensuring different T cell clones remain separated by a margin (Methods, contrastive clonality loss). This approach shifts the focus from exact TCR representation to preserving clonality. In addition, our model incorporates patient, source, and timepoint conditions as inputs, represented by fixed-length vectors learned jointly with the rest of the model through a separate embedding network, F (Fig. 2 a). In contrast to the standard approach, which learns conditional vectors by indexing into a randomly initialized embedding matrix (with the parameters of this matrix learned during training), our method is designed to learn the vector representations of conditions using the RNA and TCR profiles associated with each condition. Namely, the network F processes a subset of training cells, S e m b , and maps them into a d e m b -dimensional latent space. To calculate the embedding vector for a specific condition, TRIM averages the representations of cells corresponding to that condition. For example, the pre-treatment timepoint vector is calculated by averaging over the representations of pre-treatment cells in S e m b (Methods, Learning condition embeddings). For patient embeddings, we specifically focus on blood pre-treatment cells, as this is the available data for unseen patients. The embeddings are learned from both RNA and TCR data, using two networks, F R N A and F T C R , whose outputs are averaged to form the final embedding. Importantly, our model can make use of the fact that a patient’s RNA or TCR distribution from one source/timepoint is highly informative of their distributions in other settings. We show that this approach is more effective in generating accurate RNA and TCR distributions across conditions, and crucially, enables accurate extrapolation to new, unseen patients. During model evaluation, we discretize the decoder’s continuous outputs to estimate TCR clones, assigning pseudoclones using a greedy algorithm that groups points within a margin into the same clone (Fig. 2 b, Methods, Pseudoclone assignment). To maximize the utility of the data and test its generalizability, we train on all but one patient’s data, and test the model on the held-out patient. We repeat this procedure in a cross-validation process for each patient to obtain the full set of predictions. This allows comparing the output to the ground truth across the full dataset, but has it all be from out-of-sample held-out predictions. Single-cell RNA and TCR sequences are related only via clone count To explore the relationship between TCR and RNA, we analyzed paired scRNAseq and scTCRseq data from 27 HNSCC patients 19 . The dataset includes measurements from both circulating blood and tumor-infiltrating T cells taken before and after immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy. It consists of 73,961 T cells with RNA expression measured on 29,750 genes, paired with TCR CDR3 β -chain sequences. While each RNA expression profile is unique, many cells are clones with identical TCR sequences, with only 69.8% of T cells having unique TCRs. While prior studies suggest that identical T cell clones share similar RNA expressions 32 , many questions remain regarding the relationship between the RNA expression space and the TCR space. Towards this, we first visualize the scRNAseq data using UMAP 44 (Fig. 3 a). Strong overlap in individual patient distributions can be observed (Fig. 3 a 44 , bottom left), with four distinct clusters: T cells from blood are separated from those in the tumor, and CD4+ T cells are distinct from CD8+ T cells in both sources. While cell types are clearly separated in the transcriptomic space, the treatment effect is more subtle. There is no discernible shift in blood cells, but a slight shift occurs in tumor cells, particularly in CD8+ cells. When assigning to each cell its clone count (corresponding to the number of cells expressing the same TCR), higher clonality can be observed in regions of the RNA expression space corresponding to parts of the CD8+ T cells clusters. Larger clone sizes are more frequent in CD8+ cells and in the tumor compared to CD4+ cells and those in the blood (Supplementary Fig. 2 ) Fig. 3 Analysis of RNA and TCR joint space in HNSCC data. a UMAP visualizations of the top 100 RNA principal components for T cells from Luoma et al. 19 , colored by source (blood and tumor, top left), cell type (CD4+ and CD8+ cells, top center), condition (pre- and post-treatment, top right), patients (bottom center) and clone count (bottom right), and quantification of the number of cells per patient per condition (bottom left). b Plots comparing the pairwise distance between cells in the RNA PCA space using the first 100 principal components (y-axis) and the TCR space (x-axis), as measured by the Hamming distance between their sequences, for clones (TCR with clonality greater than 1, top panels) and non-clones (TCR with clonality equal to 1, bottom panels). Cells from the same clone (0-Hamming) are generally closer in the RNA space (top left). For a pair of non-clones, their relationship in the RNA space is approximately the same whether their TCRs are one amino acid different or almost entirely different (bottom panels). c Plots showing no relationship in non-clones between their pairwise distance in RNA space (computed in the RNA PCA space using the first 100 principal components) and their pairwise TCR distance, using either TCR-BERT embeddings or our CNN-based autoencoder embeddings. To evaluate the hypothesis about clones being closer in RNA expression, we compared cells by pairwise distance in the RNA space versus pairwise Hamming distance in the TCR space (Fig. 3 b). The distribution of RNA distances among identical TCR clones (Hamming distance of zero) is substantially lower than the RNA distances for cells farther apart in the TCR space. Interestingly, once we get beyond identical TCR clones, there is very little relationship between two cells’ TCR sequence and their RNA expression. To find any relationship, we have to filter for clones with count greater than one, and even then, the difference between the mean RNA distance between clones 0-Hamming apart and 1-Hamming apart is 4 times bigger than the difference between the means of cells 1-Hamming and 10-Hamming apart. In other words, two cells whose TCR sequences differ at only a single position are just as far in the RNA space as two cells with completely different TCR sequences. We note that this is true not only at the dataset level, but also if restricted to just within a patient, within a source (blood/tumor), within a cell type (CD4+/CD8+), or within a timepoint (pre-treatment/post-treatment) (Supplementary Fig. 3 a). We conducted the same analysis using the Levenshtein pairwise distance, and the results remained consistent (Supplementary Fig. 3 b). The same findings hold when we use neural network embeddings to represent TCR sequences, such as TCR-BERT or our convolutional autoencoder (Fig. 3 c, Supplementary Fig. 3 c). At the gene level, only genes encoding TCR chains show weak positive correlations (Supplementary Fig. 3 d). In addition, we investigated another dataset containing paired single-cell RNA-seq and TCR-seq data from 20 colorectal cancer (CRC) and 2 duodenal cancer patients 27 . This dataset includes samples from tumor tissue, adjacent normal tissue, and peripheral blood collected before and after anti-PD-1 treatment. For consistency with our main analysis, we focused on tumor and peripheral blood samples and restricted the analysis to T cells with paired RNA-seq and TCR-seq (Supplementary Fig. 4 a, Methods). This resulted in 201,048 T cells with RNA expression profiles measured across 36,027 genes, each paired with a corresponding TCR CDR3 β -chain sequence. As in the HNSCC dataset, T cells sharing identical TCR clones were closer in RNA expression space than random cell pairs (Supplementary Fig. 4 b). Furthermore, RNA-TCR distance correlations remained weak even when using TCR-BERT or CNN autoencoder embeddings (Supplementary Fig. 4 c), reinforcing the broader applicability of our pseudoclone framework and model. Building on these findings, we next evaluated TRIM in a broader disease context using a large pan-cancer dataset with paired RNA and TCR sequencing data 11 . We filtered the dataset for patients that had both an adjacent normal tissue sample and a tumor sample, each with at least 1000 cells, and for a cancer type that had at least five patients (Supplementary Fig. 5 a). The final filtered dataset includes 19 patients across 3 cancer types (esophageal cancer, thyroid cancer, endometrial cancer) and 87,304 T cells. Despite some variation across cancer types, we consistently observe that identical TCR clones are closer in RNA space than random cells (Supplementary Fig. 5 b, c), similar to the HNSCC dataset and the CRC dataset. Additionally, the lack of correlation between RNA and TCR distances, even with TCR-BERT or CNN autoencoder embeddings, persists (Supplementary Fig. 5 d), supporting the broader applicability of our pseudoclone concept and model. In summary, across multiple settings we confirm that there is little relationship between TCR sequence similarity and RNA expression: clones with very different TCR sequences can present similar RNA expression profiles. Next, we tested whether this also holds true for large clones, where we expect to have cells in different activation states. We hypothesized that even within the RNA expression regions where high clonality cells are, any individual clone will have cells with RNA expression that are closer to each other than to those of other clones. To evaluate this hypothesis, we used the HNSCC dataset. As mentioned before, cells with high clone counts (greater than 10) are enriched in the RNA space corresponding to the CD8+ T cells, while cells with clone counts no more than 10 are distributed across the whole RNA space (Fig. 4 a). We calculated the average pairwise RNA distance between cells of the same TCR clone (intra-clone distance) and compared it to the average RNA distance between cells of different clones (inter-clone distance) for high-count CD8 + T cells clones in the blood (Fig. 4 b), and in the tumor (Fig. 4 c, d). For the tumor-infiltrating CD8 + T cells, we distinguished between cytotoxic and non-cytotoxic cells based on the gene signature reported in ref. 19 (by averaging the expression of PRF1 , GZMA , GZMB , GZMH , NKG7 , GNLY ). In all cases, intra-clone distances were significantly smaller than inter-clone distances on average in the RNA space (one-sided t-test, p &lt; 0.01; Fig. 4 b–d). To ensure that this relationship was not solely driven by cells being from the same tissue source (blood or tumor) or sharing the same state, we repeated the analysis within individual cell state clusters. The same pattern held across these finer-grained subsets (Supplementary Fig. 6 a). Lastly, we extended the analysis to the small number of high-clonality CD4 + T cells in the tumor and observed the same trend of higher inter-clone compared to intra-clone RNA distances (Supplementary Fig. 6 b). Fig. 4 Transcriptional structure of high clonality CD8 T cell (HNSCC dataset). a UMAP visualizations showing that high-count clones (≥10) only exist in some parts of the RNA space, while low-count clones exist in all parts. b Left, UMAPs indicating examples of high-count CD8 clones from blood samples. Right, Box-plot comparing the pairwise Euclidean distances in the top 100 principal components (PCs) of the expression space, for cells within the same TCR clone (intra-clone) versus randomly sampled cells from different clones within the same CD8 population (inter-clone). The center line represents the median, box limits represent the 25th and 75th, and whiskers extend to 1.5 ×the interquartile range (outliers omitted). Statistical significance was determined by a one-sided independent t-test. For CD8 blood T cells: n inter = 29161 cell pairs; n intra = 26213 cell pairs; P = 0.00. c UMAP colored by the expression of cytotoxic signature genes (top) and cell states (bottom) as defined in ref. 19 . d Left, UMAPs indicating examples of high-count CD8 clones from intra-tumor samples with non-cytotoxic (top panels) or cytotoxic (bottom panels) expression profiles. Right, Box-plot comparing the pairwise Euclidean distances in RNA expression space (top 100 principal components) for cells within the same TCR clone (intra-clone) versus randomly sampled cells from different clones within the same CD8 tumor population (inter-clone), shown separately for non-cytotoxic and cytotoxic CD8 subsets. The center line represents the median, box limits represent the 25th and 75th percentiles, and whiskers extend to 1.5 ×the interquartile range (outliers omitted). Statistical significance was determined by a one-sided independent t-test. For non-cytotoxic CD8 subsets: n inter = 21528 cell pairs; n intra = 19250 cell pairs; P = 0.00. For cytotoxic CD8 subsets: n inter = 78210 cell pairs; n intra = 69875 cell pairs; P = 0.00. Thus, our analysis demonstrates that high-clonality T cells, especially CD8 + cells, exhibit a strong relationship between TCR clonality and RNA expression. Cells from the same clone are consistently closer to each other in RNA space than to cells from different clones, even within fine-grained clusters. TRIM accurately models the RNA distribution space and TCR clonality To evaluate our model’s capability to integrate the RNA and TCR modalities, we compared the out-of-sample generated data to the ground truth data. We first evaluated TRIM on the HNSCC dataset. The model output in the RNA space generally matches the ground truth: this is shown to be the case across each conditional distribution, for held-out patients (Supplementary Fig. 7 a). Importantly, as shown in Fig. 5 a, the UMAP of the RNA space for ground truth cells colored by the true TCR clone count visually matches the UMAP of the generated RNA cells and their corresponding pseudoclone count. To assess whether TRIM captures the structure of the RNA space, we performed a clustering analysis. Specifically, we clustered cells in RNA expression space using k-means (with k = 10, 25, and 50), calculated the median clone count in each cluster for both real and generated data, and then calculated the correlation between these values. In other words, we divided the RNA space into distinct groups and evaluated whether TRIM reproduced the corresponding patterns in TCR space. Across all clustering resolutions, the correlations were consistently high ( r = 0.92, 0.95, and 0.92 for k = 10, 25, and 50, respectively; Supplementary Fig. 7 b). This demonstrates that our model accurately captures the joint space at a distribution-level, and that the pseudoclone discretizations are comparable to the innately discrete real clones. While these are global features of all of the T cells in the dataset, next we evaluate whether our model also accurately models more granular slices of the data, such as marginal distributions along each condition. Fig. 5 TRIM generates accurate RNA and TCR predictions. a UMAP visualizations of the real RNA-seq data from all patients (left) and the TRIM-generated data (right), colored by clone count. The model’s generated RNA and pseudoclone counts accurately match the real RNA and clone counts of the data at a distribution level. b Plot comparing the model’s generated TCR diversity (measured by Shannon entropy) to the real diversity for each patient, source, and timepoint. c TRIM accurately predicts whether a TCR in the blood pre-treatment given as input will expand (have a higher clone count) in the blood post-treatment (left panel). A KNN (top right panels) or MLP (bottom right panel) trained to predict a binary expansion label on the same data performs similarly to the random baseline (diagonal line), whether they are given the RNA only, the TCR only, or the concatenation of the two representations. d , e With the model’s predictions using only data from blood pre-treatment, we can recoup biological conclusions made in ref. 19 about treatment effects and patient responses in both the blood and tumor, respectively: KLRG1 expression is lower in patients with a pathological response ( d ) and the percentage of CD8+ cells that are CD38+HLA-DR+ is higher in patients with a pathological response ( e ). We next examined the clonotype diversity captured by TRIM for each condition, quantified using Shannon entropy (Methods). The true clonal diversity and the corresponding predicted pseudoclone diversity were strongly correlated ( r = 0.74; Fig. 5 b). To further assess this relationship, we also measured diversity as the proportion of unique TCRs in each sample, calculated by dividing the number of distinct TCRs by the total number of cells. This alternative metric yielded a similarly high correlation between true and predicted values ( r = 0.80; Supplementary Fig. 7 c). Together, these results indicate that TRIM effectively captures key features of the TCR repertoire within its learned embedding space, across both tissue sources (blood and tumor) and treatment timepoints (pre- and post-treatment). We then evaluated TRIM on the CRC dataset to assess its generalizability. The model outputs in RNA space closely matched the ground truth, and the correlation between real and predicted clonotype diversity was high ( r = 0.67; Supplementary Fig. 8 a, b). A more detailed clustering analysis also demonstrated strong agreement between real and generated data, with high correlations in median TCR clone counts across clustering resolutions ( r = 0.94, 0.85, and 0.86 for k = 10, 25, and 50, respectively; Supplementary Fig. 8 c). To examine the robustness of TRIM across different patient populations, we investigated factors such as age and sex using the CRC dataset. We also explored how varying the number of patients in the training data affected model performance. Specifically, we performed a leave-group-out analysis, where entire subgroups were excluded during training—for example, excluding all female patients, or patients in the upper or lower 15 t h percentile for age or sample count—and used these groups for testing (Supplementary Fig. 9 a). Across these different conditions, TRIM consistently captured the joint RNA-TCR space at the distribution level, as indicated by high correlations across multiple clustering resolutions ( k = 10, 25, and 50; Supplementary Fig. 9 b–f).We observed that higher-resolution clustering makes predicting median TCR clone counts more challenging, and this difficulty is further amplified when evaluating samples with few cells, as smaller clusters contain very limited information for accurate estimation. However, TRIM maintained strong performance in predicting clonotype diversity, with high correlations between real and predicted values (Supplementary Fig. 9 b–f, right panels). We did observe reduced generalizability when older patients were left out of training (Supplementary Fig. 9 d). We hypothesize that this difficulty in generalization may be due to the distinct properties of this patients’ subpopulation, which shows reduced T cell clonal diversity. Nonetheless, the results across all subgroup analyses were consistent, indicating that TRIM is robust to demographic and sample-size variations. We also evaluated our model on the pan-cancer dataset 11 (Supplementary Fig. 10 a). To quantitatively assess TRIM’s predictions, we clustered cells in the RNA space using k means ( k = 20) and then calculated the real and predicted clonal diversity and mean clone count for that cluster (Supplementary Fig. 10 b). We found a high degree of correlation in both cases, r = 0.97 and r = 0.97, respectively. In addition, the UMAP projections of the real data and our model’s predicted data showed that the model had learned to generate, for held-out patients, accurate RNA expression profiles based on the source (normal tissue/tumor) and cancer type (esophageal cancer or ESCA, thyroid cancer or THCA, uterine corpus endometrial carcinoma or UCEC) (Supplementary Fig. 10 c, left plots). Furthermore, the model also learned to match pseudoclone count in each region of the RNA space to the corresponding ground truth clone count for that region (Supplementary Fig. 10 c, right plots). Together, these results indicate that the model achieves strong accuracy at both the dataset and cluster levels. TRIM accurately predicts clonal expansion and activation status of T cells post-treatment Next, we considered the most granular resolution: expansion prediction at the level of individual cells. In the HNSCC dataset, the blood samples pre-treatment included 15,147 unique TCR clones. Among these, 725 persisted in post-treatment blood, with 185 expanded post-treatment. Notably, 66 of these 185 expanded clones (36%) were also detected in the post-treatment tumor. And 64 of these 66 TCRs expanded in the tumor post-treatment. This observation supported prior findings of a connection between peripheral (blood) and tumor-associated T-cell dynamics 19 , motivating us to model T-cell expansion using blood-derived data alone. Due to the challenge of directly predicting TCR sequences, as we’ve shown before, that single-cell RNA and TCR sequences are related only via clone count, we modeled expansion at the clone level and restricted the analysis to TCRs present in both conditions. Given a specific TCR and its clone count in the blood pre-treatment, we aimed to predict whether its clone count would increase or decrease post-treatment (normalized by the total number of cells in each condition). To do this, we mapped the TCR to the latent space and obtained the corresponding latent vector z . We then swapped out the learned conditional embedding for “pre-treatment” and instead used the learned embedding for “post-treatment”, and decoded as usual. We compared the resulting pseudoclone count to the pseudoclone count obtained by decoding the original latent vectors, and if the former was higher, we predicted expansion. We defined expansion in the ground truth data as a TCR that is observed in both timepoints and whose count in the post-treatment distribution is higher than in the pre-treatment distribution, normalized by the total number of cells in each condition (see Methods for more details). As shown in Fig. 5 c our model achieved an Area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC) of 0.92 for this prediction task. In contrast, baseline methods, such as a K-nearest neighbor (KNN) classifier or a multilayer perceptron (MLP), performed similarly to the random baseline (diagonal line) on predicting a binary label of expansion, when given as input the RNA expression, the TCR autoencoder embeddings, or the concatenation of the two. Similarly, we evaluated TRIM on the CRC dataset. In leave-one-out evaluation, TRIM achieved an AUC of 0.83 for predicting post-treatment clonal expansion, whereas baseline models (KNN and MLP) performed worse than or near random (even after extensive greedy hyperparameter optimization) regardless of whether they used RNA expression, TCR embeddings, or their combination as input (Supplementary Fig. 11 a–d, Methods). To further assess robustness, we tested TRIM in leave-group-out settings, where the test patients had post-treatment measurements. TRIM maintained competitive performance, achieving AUCs of 0.68, 0.81, and 0.78 for leave-female-out, leave-young-out, and leave-more-cells-out evaluations, respectively, while baseline models again performed near random (Supplementary Fig. 12 ). We then evaluated TRIM’s ability to predict clonal expansion at individual cell level in the pan-cancer dataset (Supplementary Fig. 10 d). We predicted whether a particular TCR found in the adjacent normal tissue had a higher clone count in the tumor. We performed this prediction task in the same conditional generative way as in the HNSCC dataset, subset to only TCRs that appear in both conditions. As before, the KNN classifier and neural network baselines that received the concatenation of the RNA and TCR representations performed similar to the random baseline, while our model clearly outperformed these baselines. However, the AUC is lower than in the HNSCC dataset (0.57 vs. 0.92), which can be explained by the T cell populations in the circulating peripheral blood containing more information on T cell populations in the tumor than those in the adjacent normal tissue. We hypothesize that the model’s ability to predict T cell expansion in the tumor from adjacent normal tissue better than random at all is due to signaling and communication between these T cell populations, albeit to a lower degree than with the circulating T cells in the blood. To validate the usefulness of our model for downstream biological analyses, we compared its predictions based on pre-treatment blood data to analyses on tumor and post-treatment T-cell phenotypes reported in ref. 19 on the HNSCC dataset (Fig. 5 d, e, Supplementary Fig. 13 ). In 19 , the authors reported an expansion of CD38+/HLA-DR+ proliferative CD8 T cells in the blood over the course of treatment and found that the frequency of activated KLRG1-negative PD-1+ CD8 T-cells in the blood pre-treatment and on-treatment was strongly associated with intra-tumor pathological response. First, we calculated the percentage of proliferative CD38+/HLA-DR+ T cells for each condition based on our predicted data and found that this population increases in the post-treatment conditions (Supplementary Fig. 13 ). On a per-patient and timepoint basis, our model’s predictions are well correlated with the ground truth for this statistic ( r = 0.89). The slope parameter of a regression of real values of this metric with the predicted values inferred from our model’s output is also shown, yielding β 1 = 0.82. Next, we modeled KLRG1 expression in PD-1+ CD8 cells and found that it decreases more for patients that have a pathological response than for those that do not, with a per-patient correlation of 0.82 (Fig. 5 d). Lastly, we isolated predicted CD8+ cells, calculated the proportion that are CD38+/HLA-DR+ and found that this is also strongly correlated with pathological response (Fig. 5 e). Our model’s predictions are highly correlated with the real per-patient data ( r = 0.90). Overall, these analyses show that TRIM generates accurate and meaningful predictions of clonal expansion. TRIM identifies genes associated with clonal expansion To further analyze the expansion prediction aspect of our model, we investigated the features it used to perform this task. Namely, we performed a differential gene expression analysis when comparing all pseudoclones predicted to expand by our model to those not predicted to expand in the blood T-cells. We then ranked the genes by their log fold change, subject to the restriction of being expressed in at least 10% of cells. We repeated this process for the ground truth data based on real observed expansion and their measured gene expression in each condition. We then compared the two ranked lists by considering the intersection of their first k elements, for increasing values of k . A random model’s overlap would be on the diagonal line, only getting an intersection of \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$\frac{k}{{n}_{genes}}$$\end{document} k n g e n e s genes in expectation. We first evaluated TRIM on the HNSCC dataset. Our model’s AUC with respect to this baseline is 0.92 (Fig. 6 a). We repeated this process separately for CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subsets, resulting in AUCs of 0.80 and 0.77, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 14 a). We also evaluated this aspect of our model by taking a gene signature of expansion and a gene signature of non-expansion that were previously identified in ref. 19 . When we restricted our analysis to these genes and ranked them by log-fold change, expansion-signature genes were more likely to be up-regulated in clones the model predicted to expand (Fig. 6 a). Quantification using a Wilcoxon ranksum test 45 for the hypothesis whether the model ranks the expansion signature genes higher than the non-expansion signature genes resulted in a p-value of 0.064. Because the signatures were derived from tumor tissue whereas our analysis models expansion in blood, we expect some attenuation; nonetheless, the result shows a directionally consistent enrichment and aligns with prior evidence that tumor-associated expansion programs are detectable in blood. This shows that our model accurately predicts not only which clones will expand but also what genes will become differentially expressed through that expansion. Fig. 6 TRIM identifies genes associated with clonal expansion. Unless noted, panel ( a ) uses all T cells; analyses in panels ( b – d ) were restricted to CD8 T cells. a Plot showing the proportion of genes in common between differentially expressed genes in pseudoclones predicted to expand and those not predicted to expand versus real clone data in the whole T cell population. Genes were ranked by their log-fold change in expression. The ranked gene lists derived from the model predictions were compared to those from the ground truth by calculating the overlap of the top k genes for increasing k . The expected random overlap is shown as a diagonal baseline, representing the expected intersection for a random model. On the right, expansion signature genes from 19 ranked towards the correct end of the list of differentially expressed genes based on TRIM's pseudoclone predictions. A one-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test assessing whether expansion signature genes are ranked higher than non-expansion signature genes yielded P = 0.064. b Plotting genes ranked by gradients alongside their log-fold changes in CD8 T cells. The log-fold changes were calculated for three comparisons: expanded vs. non-expanded cells post-treatment (left), expanding vs. non-expanding cells pre-treatment (center), and clones with sizes greater than 10 vs. smaller clones pre-treatment (right). The red line indicates the linear regression fit. c Venn diagrams comparing significant genes identified by different combinations of pairwise differential gene expression analyses in CD8 T cells, with the top and bottom 1% gradient ranked genes from the saliency analysis. Differential expression was assessed using a two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test. P-values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Bonferroni correction, and genes with adjusted p-value &lt; 0.01 were considered significant. d Heatmap indicating the number of genes in each list enriched in seven selected processes relevant to T-cell expansion. The color scale bar represents the negative log10 of the FDR-adjusted p-values from a one-sided hypergeometric test conducted for each gene set and the corresponding list of genes identified by each method. Taking this analysis a step further, we probed the model for genes that are predicted to be differentially expressed (DE) from pre-treatment to post-treatment by pseudoclones predicted to expand in blood (Supplementary Fig. 14 b). Gene set enrichment analysis of the DE genes revealed enrichment for cell cycle and cell proliferation pathways, expected to be involved in clonal expansion (Supplementary Fig. 14 c). These results support the accuracy of our pseudoclone gene expression predictions. We then evaluated TRIM’s ability to identify differentially expressed genes on the CRC dataset. In leave-one-out evaluation, TRIM achieved AUC of 0.85 for all T cells, 0.82 for CD4 cells, and 0.79 for CD8 cells (Supplementary Fig. 15 a). Across different subgroup analyses, TRIM maintained strong performance, with AUCs for all T cells of 0.83, 0.90, and 0.81 for leave-female-out, leave-young-out, and leave-more-cells-out, respectively; for CD4 cells, 0.83, 0.83, and 0.81; and for CD8 cells, 0.72, 0.84, and 0.72 (Supplementary Fig. 15 b–d). These results further validate TRIM’s ability to generalize to different cancer types as well as across diverse patient conditions. To identify the genes that the model utilizes for predicting CD8 T cell clonal expansion, we conducted a saliency analysis. This involved creating a classifier for clonal expansion based on the network’s latent space and examining the gradients in relation to each input gene. Through this saliency analysis, we generated a ranking of genes based on their predictive power for expansion, ranging from those strongly negatively predictive to those strongly positively predictive. We compared this ranking (gradient) with the results of routine DE analyses to evaluate its relevance. Specifically, we examined three DE scenarios: (1) post-treatment expanded versus non-expanded groups, (2) pre-treatment expanding versus non-expanding groups, and (3) a simulated case with no post-treatment data, comparing cells with large clone sizes versus small clone sizes. For each method, we identified important genes based on corrected p-values (for DE analyses) or ranking scores (in our method). Pearson correlation analyses showed that the genes identified as important for our model to predict clonal expansion align more closely with the pre-treatment expanding versus non-expanding comparison (0.52) than with the other two DE approaches (-0.07 and 0.22) (Fig. 6 b). From Fig. 6 c, we observe that gradient genes have limited overlap with the genes identified through log-fold changes in post-treatment and clone-size comparisons, and a relatively larger number of shared genes with the pre-treatment DE list. To further assess the biological relevance of the genes identified by each approach, we performed Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis using the gseapy package 46 (Supplementary Fig. 16 , Methods). We found that the gene sets identified as enriched among gradient based genes largely agreed with gene sets identified using the more standard DE analyses (Supplementary Fig. 16 ). We then queried ChatGPT to compile a list of genes associated with T-cell expansion and analyzed the resulting lists across methods (Fig. 6 d). This analysis was inspired by the findings in ref. 47 , which demonstrated the potential of large language models for annotating gene sets. Our method (“Gradient”), along with the supervised methods that utilized post-treatment labels (“Expanded vs. non-expanded” and “Expanding vs. Non-expanding”), successfully identified genes involved in cell cycle ( AURKA , CENPU , DUT ), T cell effector function and cytotoxicity ( PRF1 , GZMA , GZMH , GNLY , NKG7 , CST7 ), T cell activation and co-stimulation ( CTLA4 , TNFRSF9 ), mitochondrial and metabolic pathways ( ATP5PF , VDAC2 , DHTKD1 , IBA57 ), and T cell migration ( CCR7 , CCL5 , IL6R , FOXO1 ). Notably, the CD38+ CD8 T cells that expanded in blood during treatment were previously shown to exhibit activation and proliferative signatures; here, the identification of a T cell migration signature is new and suggests these cells may traffic to the tumor and lymph nodes, which is consistent with this population having TCRs that expanded in tumors during therapy. Importantly, while the supervised differential expression (DE) analyses serve as theoretical upper bounds—because they rely directly on post-treatment labels—our method was able to recover similar biological signals without requiring post-treatment measurements at inference time. Although TRIM requires access to paired pre- and post-treatment data during training, once trained, it can be applied to new pre-treatment-only samples to identify gene programs associated with T-cell expansion. This capability provides both model interpretability—by demonstrating that its predictions are driven by meaningful biological signals—-and clinical relevance, as it provides these predictive insights in a common clinical setting where post-treatment samples are unavailable. This enables TRIM to provide meaningful insights in settings where post-treatment measurements are not available, bridging the gap between supervised analyses and real-world applicability. In contrast, differentially expressed genes identified by comparing large versus small clones pre-treatment were enriched for cytotoxic, effector, and immune-regulatory programs but did not show significant enrichment for expansion-related programs (assessed via hypergeometric tests per gene set with FDR correction; enrichment shown as \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$-{\log }_{10}$$\end{document} − log 10 FDR-adjusted p-values in Fig. 6 d). This suggests that TRIM provides a more informative and biologically grounded view of T-cell expansion under real-world constraints. Discussion Recent advances in technologies for jointly profiling transcriptomes and TCR sequences at the single-cell level have led to the development of computational methods aiming to integrate these modalities 32 – 34 . However, many of these approaches make simplifications: by aggregating data—e.g., averaging gene expression across cells within the same clonotype and discarding single-cell variability, by restricting their outputs to categorical predictions like cluster labels or antigen specificity scores, or by projecting new cells into an embedding learned during training, limiting their ability to generate full transcriptomic and clonal outputs and generalize to out-of-sample settings 32 – 34 . Our approach addresses these limitations by modeling the joint structure of gene expression and TCR sequence information at the single-cell level, without reducing the data to per-clone averages. By explicitly modeling clonal identity and expansion dynamics, TRIM enables predictions that go beyond label classification, generating full gene expression profiles and clonal behaviors for unseen cells at later time points or in different tissue sites, overcoming the limitations of previous methods and unlocking new applications in immunological inference. We used TRIM to predict the transcriptomic profiles and clonotypes of T cells in unseen HNSCC patients. We observed little relationship between cells’ TCR sequence similarity and their gene expression values, contrasting with reports that TCR sequences can predict T cell fate outcomes. T cells with similar TCR sequences may share transcriptional programs because their TCRs have similar antigen specificity, signaling strength, and encounter similar tissue microenvironments, which then drive convergence toward similar functional states. However, even T cells with shared TCR sequences may diverge in their functional states due to TCR-extrinsic factors: variable antigen and cytokine exposure, variable costimulatory molecules, epigenetic plasticity, and stochastic cell fate bifurcations 48 , 49 . Previous studies, including CoNGA, metaCoNGA, and a range of TCR scoring frameworks (TiRP, TCR-innate, TCR-CD8, TCR-reg, TCR-mem), systematically examined the relationships between TCR sequence and gene expression, and established that TCR sequence provides information on both antigen specificity and transcriptional cell fate 32 , 40 , 50 , 51 . However this effect was largest in unconventional T cells, which are not present in our data (as shown by the lack of expression of unconventional T cell markers T C R D , T C R G , and low R O R C expression; Supplementary Fig. 17 ), and TCR-extrinsic effects were the larger determinant of T cell fate. Despite a weak relationship between TCR sequence similarity and gene expression, there was a strong relationship between gene expression and clonal expansion, enabling accurate prediction of T cell state and clonal expansion from pre-treatment blood samples. We showed that this predictive capacity generalized to other disease settings by evaluating TRIM on the CRC dataset and testing the robustness of TRIM on patient subgroups with different covariates. We also validated that TRIM accurately predicts clonal expansion from adjacent normal tissues across multiple cancer types. To further interpret our model, we asked which genes it leveraged to predict clonal expansion in the HNSCC immunotherapy study. Our analysis revealed that the model relies on biologically meaningful genes, including many that align with known markers of T-cell activity. Notably, our findings support the idea that pre-treatment T cells destined to expand during treatment already exhibit a distinct transcriptional program. This aligns with previous observations that many expanding T cell clones in the blood during checkpoint blockade share TCRs with tumor-infiltrating T cells, suggesting that they are tumor-reactive. One possible interpretation is that prior recognition of tumor antigens—potentially in tumor-draining lymph nodes—triggers early transcriptional changes related to T cell activation, effector functions, and metabolic adaptation. This hypothesis is further supported by data showing that the pre-treatment frequency of activated CD8+ T cells (CD38+ HLA-DR+) in the blood strongly correlates with subsequent tumor response to checkpoint blockade. Beyond immune-related signatures, our saliency analysis also revealed genes involved in metabolism and signaling pathways, a category that was less prominent in traditional differential expression analyses. This suggests that metabolic reprogramming may be an early determinant of T cell expansion, potentially influencing later immune activation. The identification of metabolic genes further supports the idea that expanding T cells are primed before treatment, possibly undergoing metabolic shifts that enable subsequent clonal expansion. Together, these findings highlight the utility of our model in uncovering biologically meaningful signals that inform mechanisms of T cell activation, effector function, and therapeutic response. We have demonstrated that our model structure generalizes well across cancer types 19 , 27 , and it’s robust to factors that introduce intrasample variability, such as age and sex, or number of sequenced cells per patient. While we recognize that a model trained on multiple cohorts, including a large variety of cancer types, could potentially be directly applicable to unseen cancer-type settings without retraining, given the current paucity of such datasets, we believe this is not currently achievable, nor the most accurate and cost-efficient strategy to address our problem at hand: being able to predict missing data in complex cohorts across time points and tissue-sites. To our knowledge, no other computational method productively uses RNA and TCR sequences to predict transcriptional states across tissues and time points; however, the work presented here still leaves many questions open. For instance, the transcriptional state of a T cell after immunotherapy clearly depends, to some extent, on tumor antigen binding and thus on the TCR sequence. An open question is how to leverage external antigen-binding prediction models into this framework. There is a pressing need for biomarkers of cancer progression and treatment response, and multimodal models incorporating longitudinal measurements across multiple tissue sites will drive discovery of these biomarkers. TRIM is the first model to accomplish this, and overall, we envision TRIM as a valuable tool for predicting cancer patient T cell states and response to cancer immunotherapies, based on measurements from peripheral blood. We also show that our approach generalizes to T cells in diverse cancer datasets. While longitudinal, multimodal datasets are currently limited, we expect model improvements as more datasets are collected, which will power the discovery of shared immune programs characterizing productive T cell responses during immunotherapy and in other disease contexts 19 , 27 , 28 . Methods TRIM Let the data be captured by two matrices \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${{{{\bf{X}}}}}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}}\in {{\mathbb{R}}}^{n\times {d}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}}}$$\end{document} X RNA ∈ R n × d RNA and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${{{{\bf{X}}}}}_{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}}\in {{\mathbb{R}}}^{n\times {d}_{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}}}$$\end{document} X TCR ∈ R n × d TCR where n is the number of cells and d RNA and d TCR are the dimensions of the RNA modality and TCR modality, respectively. Each cell also has associated condition labels l composed of: patient l p ∈ {0… n patient }, treatment timing l t ∈ {pre-treatment, post-treatment}, source l b ∈ {blood, tumor}, where n patient denotes the number of patients in the dataset. Our model consists of two encoders E RNA ( x ∣ l ), E TCR ( x ∣ l ) and two decoders D RNA ( z ∣ l ), D TCR ( z ∣ l ). The encoders take as input cells from their respective modality x RNA ~ X RNA and x TCR ~ X TCR and produce latent representations μ RNA , σ RNA , μ TCR , σ TCR in the latent space \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${{\mathbb{R}}}^{n\times {d}_{z}}$$\end{document} R n × d z , where d z is the chosen dimensionality for the latent space. These latent representations are averaged into one vector along the latent dimensions μ = mean( μ RNA , μ TCR ) and σ = mean( σ RNA , σ TCR ). They are then used to parameterize a normal distribution which is sampled from and then given to the decoder along with the original conditions to produce outputs \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${\widetilde{{{{\bf{x}}}}}}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}},{\widetilde{{{{\bf{x}}}}}}_{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}}$$\end{document} x ~ RNA , x ~ TCR respectively. Taken together, this produces: 1 \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${{{{\boldsymbol{\mu }}}}}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}},{{{{\boldsymbol{\sigma }}}}}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}}={E}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}}({{{{\bf{x}}}}}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}}| l)$$\end{document} μ RNA , σ RNA = E RNA ( x RNA ∣ l ) 2 \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${{{{\boldsymbol{\mu }}}}}_{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}},{{{{\boldsymbol{\sigma }}}}}_{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}}={E}_{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}}({{{{\bf{x}}}}}_{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}}| l)$$\end{document} μ TCR , σ TCR = E TCR ( x TCR ∣ l ) 3 \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${{{\bf{z}}}} \sim {{{\mathcal{N}}}}({{{\rm{mean}}}}(\,{{{{\boldsymbol{\mu }}}}}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}},{{{{\boldsymbol{\mu }}}}}_{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}}),{{{\rm{mean}}}}({{{{\boldsymbol{\sigma }}}}}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}},{{{{\boldsymbol{\sigma }}}}}_{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}}))$$\end{document} z ~ N ( mean ( μ RNA , μ TCR ) , mean ( σ RNA , σ TCR ) ) 4 \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${\widetilde{{{{\bf{x}}}}}}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}}={D}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}}({{{\bf{z}}}}| l)$$\end{document} x ~ RNA = D RNA ( z ∣ l ) 5 \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${\widetilde{{{{\bf{x}}}}}}_{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}}={D}_{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}}({{{\bf{z}}}}| l)$$\end{document} x ~ TCR = D TCR ( z ∣ l ) The encoders and decoders are trained jointly under a variational autoencoder regime 52 . There is a KL-divergence loss that encourages the latent vector to be distributed as a normal: 6 \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${L}_{{{{\rm{KL}}}}}={{{\rm{KL}}}}({{{\mathcal{N}}}}(\,{{{\boldsymbol{\mu }}}},{{{\boldsymbol{\sigma }}}}),{{{\mathcal{N}}}}(0,{{{\bf{I}}}})).$$\end{document} L KL = KL ( N ( μ , σ ) , N ( 0 , I ) ) . Contrastive clonality loss The reconstruction loss encourages the output to be close to the original points. For the RNA space, we use the standard L 2 loss. For the TCR space, we introduce the contrastive clonality loss : 7 \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${L}_{{{{\rm{cc}}}}}={\sum}_{i,j}{I}_{ij}\cdot {d}_{ij}+(1-{I}_{ij})\cdot \max (0,\delta -{d}_{ij}),$$\end{document} L cc = ∑ i , j I i j ⋅ d i j + ( 1 − I i j ) ⋅ max ( 0 , δ − d i j ) , where \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${d}_{ij}=| | {\widetilde{{{{\bf{x}}}}}}_{{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}}_{i}}-{\widetilde{{{{\bf{x}}}}}}_{{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}}_{j}}| {| }_{1}$$\end{document} d i j = ∣ ∣ x ~ TCR i − x ~ TCR j ∣ ∣ 1 , I i j = 1 if i = j and I i j = 0 if i ≠ j , and δ is a chosen margin. Thus the full reconstruction loss is: 8 \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${L}_{recon}=| | {{{{\bf{x}}}}}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}}-{\widetilde{{{{\bf{x}}}}}}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}}| {| }_{2}+{L}_{{{{\rm{cc}}}}}.$$\end{document} L r e c o n = ∣ ∣ x RNA − x ~ RNA ∣ ∣ 2 + L cc . The contrastive clonality loss operates on the decoder output in the TCR space; it uses an indicator variable to select reconstructions of cells that are identical TCR clones and minimizes the distance between their reconstructions. For all other pairs of cells, their reconstructions in the TCR space must be separated by at least the margin δ . The reconstructed TCR space thus preserves some aspects of the original space, namely that TCR clones are close together. The reconstructed TCR space is not enforced to preserve the global structure outside of clones, though. The idea to only preserve local clone information in our joint RNA and TCR model, rather than a) preserve global TCR space information, or b) preserve no TCR space information is motivated by our observations in Figs. 3 and 4 . TCR clones are closer in the RNA space than random, even after accounting for factors such as cell type, so including that information is valuable for the representation. But outside of exact clones, no embedding of the TCR space yielded a distance structure that was predictive of the RNA space. Using instead the standard L 2 reconstruction loss, the model would have to store enough information in the latent space z to fully reconstruct the TCR representations of all points. Since the TCR space does not share the same pairwise distance structure as the RNA space, forcing the model to fully reconstruct the TCR space would worsen its performance in the RNA space. In summary, our contrastive clonality loss forces the model to learn a reconstruction that preserves only the local TCR structure informative for the RNA space. Pseudoclone assignment Since our generative model samples from a continuous random distribution, its decoded output in the TCR space is also continuous. To compare metrics based on clone count, which as we’ve shown in Figures 3 and 4 is the only signal shared between the RNA and TCR spaces, the generated output must be discretized. The procedure we use to do this is a greedy algorithm that chooses a randomly generated cell’s TCR representation and assigns all other cells’ TCR representations to the same clone if they are within δ (the margin used in the contrastive clonality loss) and belong to the same patient. We call these assigned clones pseudoclones , emphasizing that the generated TCR space is not globally similar to the real TCR space. This process continues until all cells have received a pseudoclone assignment. During data preprocessing, TCR clone counts were computed at the dataset level rather than per patient. This may slightly affect expansion counts for TCRs shared across patients, though such cases are rare (less than 1%). Learning condition embeddings TRIM is a conditional model that takes as input conditions corresponding to the patient, source, and timepoint of the cell being encoded or decoded. These conditions are represented as fixed-length vectors that are learned jointly with the rest of the model through the use of a separate embedding network F . As depicted in Figure 2 a. This network takes in cells from a fixed subset of n emb training cells, a collection which we will refer to as S emb , and outputs them into a d emb -dimensional space. These same cells are then grouped and averaged by each different conditional label to calculate the embedding vector for that conditional label. For example, the d emb -dimensional vector for the pre-treatment timepoint is calculated by averaging over the representation in the output space of F for points in S emb that are pre-treatment, each of which is a d emb -dimensional vector. More generally, the representation for condition c is calculated as: 9 \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$${{{{\bf{v}}}}}_{c}=\frac{1}{{\sum }_{i=1}^{{n}_{{{{\rm{emb}}}}}}{{\mathbb{I}}}_{{l}_{i}=c}}{\sum}_{i=1}^{n}{{\mathbb{I}}}_{{l}_{i}=c}\cdot F({{{{\bf{x}}}}}_{i}),$$\end{document} v c = 1 ∑ i = 1 n emb I l i = c ∑ i = 1 n I l i = c ⋅ F ( x i ) , where x i and l i are the scRNAseq vector and condition of cell i , respectively. For the patient embedding, we first subset the embedding points to just the blood source and pre-treatment timepoint, as our use case requires extrapolating to a patient where only these cells are available. It is important to note that the model does not use the arbitrary patient ID as a direct feature. Instead, the patient ID serves as a grouping key. The model learns a patient-specific embedding vector by aggregating the pre-treatment blood-derived RNA and TCR data for that specific patient (as described above). This learned vector, which captures the patient’s unique biological baseline, is what is used as the patient-level condition. These embeddings are learned using both the RNA and TCR representation of each cell, i.e ., F consists of two networks F RNA and F TCR , and F ( x ) is the dimension-wise average of F RNA ( x RNA ) and F TCR ( x TCR ). The motivation behind this method of learning embeddings is that the standard way of learning a conditional vector would be to index into a randomly initiated embedding matrix whose parameters are learned during training. This works for the source and timepoint vectors, because these are low cardinality variables (each can take on only two possible values), and our predictions will not take place on novel values of these variables. For the patient embedding, however, there is no obvious and effective way of learning an appropriate vector that will allow for accurate extrapolation to new unseen patients. We attempted to use patient metadata, but the model was unable to accurately generate informative RNA or TCR distributions. We found that only the patient’s RNA or TCR distribution in one source/timepoint could accurately predict that patient’s RNA or TCR distribution in another source/timepoint. Thus, we formulated the problem as a conditional generation of a patient’s blood post-treatment, tumor pre-treatment, and tumor post-treatment distributions based on a patient embedding learned from the blood pre-treatment from that patient and the general embeddings for the source and timepoint effect learned in this way. Shannon entropy Shannon entropy was used to quantify TCR clone diversity. For each sample, we identified all observed T-cell clones, counted the frequency of each unique clone, and converted these counts to probabilities by dividing by the total number of observations. Entropy was then calculated as 10 \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$H=-{\sum}_{i}{p}_{i}{\log }_{2}{p}_{i},$$\end{document} H = − ∑ i p i log 2 p i , where p i represents the probability of clone i . Saliency analysis The saliency analysis of the HNSCC dataset was conducted to evaluate how TCR expansion in CD8 T cells is predicted from pre-treatment blood data within the presented model framework. To do this, we replaced the latent layer of the autoencoder with a binary prediction layer that outputs a one-hot vector corresponding to whether the input cell’s TCR expands in the post-treatment sample, without using the decoder layer. We trained an otherwise identical version of the model and used the PyTorch autograd function to evaluate the gradient of the expansion prediction output with respect to each input gene 53 . The gradients were then averaged across all cells in the distribution to get the reported mean. Differential gene expression analysis To compare with routine analysis, we calculated log-fold changes for genes under the following conditions: between expanded and non-expanded clones post-treatment; between expanding and non-expanding clones pre-treatment; between clones with sizes greater than 10 and smaller than 10 pre-treatment; and between clones with sizes greater than 1 and smaller than 1 pre-treatment. These log-fold changes were calculated using the FindMarkers function from the Seurat package 54 . To identify significant genes detected by each method, we applied specific criteria: for the log-fold change method, we selected genes with an adjusted p-value &lt; 0.01, and for the gradient-based method, we selected the top 1% of genes with the highest or lowest gradients. To further understand the biological relevance of these genes, we performed gene set enrichment analysis using the GSEApy package 46 . For visualization, we selected the top 15 significantly enriched GO terms (adjusted P-value &lt; 0.1) from each method, and plotted the union of these terms in Supplementary Fig. 16 . Full enrichment results are provided in Supplementary Data 1 . Furthermore, we compiled the union of significant genes identified across all methods and used ChatGPT to identify and highlight gene sets specifically relevant to T-cell expansions, drawing on the findings in ref. 47 . Datasets HNSCC dataset This dataset is derived from the publicly available data from ref. 19 . We used paired scRNAseq and scTCRseq data from 28 patients across 4 different conditions: blood pre-treatment, blood post-treatment, tumor pre-treatment and tumor post-treatment. The pre-treatment and post-treatment timepoints are the B1 and B2 timepoints in the reference paper, respectively. Colorectal cancer dataset This dataset is derived from the publicly available data from ref. 27 . We used paired scRNAseq and scTCRseq data from 22 patients across 4 different conditions: blood pre-treatment, blood post-treatment, tumor pre-treatment, and tumor post-treatment. In the source study, “pre” and “post-treatment” correspond to baseline and on-treatment visits. Because some patients had multiple on-treatment samples, we aggregated those measurements at the patient level for each condition to make full use of the data. Pan-cancer dataset This dataset is derived from the publicly available data from ref. 11 . We applied filtering for patients with samples containing at least 1000 cells in both the tumor and adjacent normal tissue. This resulted in 19 patients and 3 cancer types: ESCA (esophageal cancer, 5 patients), THCA (thyroid carcinoma, 8 patients), and UCEC (uterine corpus endometrial carcinoma, 6 patients). Processing of single-cell data We log-transformed and normalized the RNA expression of each cell and trained our model on the first 100 principal components of the data. We padded the TCR sequence to length 80 (the maximum length) of the one-hot representations of the amino acids and a null token when performing string processing. We normalized the TCR counts by the total number of cells in each slice of interest (e.g., when comparing pre-treatment counts to post-treatment counts, the respective total number of cells in each distribution was used as the denominator). The same was done for turning generated pseudoclone counts into proportions for comparison. Expansion across a variable, for example, “treatment”, was then defined as a TCR being observed in both distributions and having a higher proportion in post-treatment than pre-treatment distributions. TCR representations The TCR representations used in TRIM are based on the trained embeddings produced by a CNN autoencoder trained in a pre-processing step. Each TCR was represented by its CDR3 sequence from β chain, which was input to the model as a null-padded sequence of amino acids. Each amino acid was encoded using its corresponding Atchley factors. The CNN autoencoder consists of an encoder with 3 layers, batch normalization, and leaky ReLU activations that maps to a 100-dimensional latent space. The decoder is a symmetric convolutional network. It is trained for 50,000 steps, and then the middle latent layer is extracted and used as the input to TRIM. Heldout patient prediction To maximize data utility, we trained on all but one patient’s data and used the held-out patient for testing. We repeated this across patients in a cross-validation process to obtain the full set of predictions. To assess model robustness, we additionally performed a leave-group-out evaluation, in which patients with predefined characteristics were excluded from training and the model was evaluated on the entire held-out group. When generating cells for each patient, we used a fully generative sampling process that does not simply autoencode/decode the real input points. Namely, we sampled randomly from an isotropic Gaussian, concatenated the target timepoint and source embedding (e.g., “tumor” and “post-treatment”), and then decoded: \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$\begin{array}{rcl}{{{\bf{z}}}} &amp; \sim &amp; {{{\mathcal{N}}}}(0,{{{\bf{I}}}}),\\ {\widetilde{{{{\bf{x}}}}}}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}} &amp;=&amp; {D}_{{{{\rm{RNA}}}}}({{{\bf{z}}}}| l),\\ {\widetilde{{{{\bf{x}}}}}}_{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}} &amp;=&amp; {D}_{{{{\rm{TCR}}}}}({{{\bf{z}}}}| l).\end{array}$$\end{document} z ~ N ( 0 , I ) , x ~ RNA = D RNA ( z ∣ l ) , x ~ TCR = D TCR ( z ∣ l ) . As a result, the predictions of our generative model cannot be compared to real data on a cell-by-cell basis, as each z sampled from the Gaussian distribution is random. However, the distribution of cells per condition can be compared to the real distribution of cells for that condition, and likewise for any other identifiable subset of conditions, or even the distribution across the whole dataset. Metric for benchmarking The performance of TRIM and baseline methods for predicting TCR expansion was evaluated using the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) Curve (AUC) metric. The AUC measures the model's ability to distinguish between positive and negative classes by calculating the area under the ROC curve, which plots the true positive rate against the false positive rate at different classification thresholds. This metric assesses a model's overall discriminative ability; higher AUC values indicate better performance. Reporting summary Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Supplementary information Supplementary Information Description of Additional Supplementary Files Supplementary Data 1 Reporting Summary Transparent Peer Review file Source data Source Data