The I‐Learn Cognition and Behavior program for non‐pharmacological treatment of agitation in nursing home residents with neurocognitive disorders: A cluster randomized trial

Abstract INTRODUCTION The “I‐Learn Cognition and Behavior” program, integrating e‐learning and simulation, aims to equip long‐term care facility staff with non‐pharmacological approaches for managing agitation in residents with neurocognitive disorders. This study evaluated the program's effectiveness. METHOD In this multicenter cluster‐randomized trial, long‐term care facilities served as the randomization units for a population of residents with neurocognitive disorders and agitation who underwent blinded assessments at baseline, 3, 6, and 10 months. Assessments included the Cohen–Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI) as the primary outcome, the Neuropsychiatric Inventory‐Nursing Home (NPI‐NH), the Quality of Life in Alzheimer's Disease questionnaire, the Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI), psychotropic use, and hospitalizations. Mixed‐effects models analyzed changes in outcomes. RESULTS Twelve long‐term care facilities were randomized to receive the I‐Learn program (intervention) or usual care (control). One hundred sixty‐nine residents were enrolled. There were no significant differences in total CMAI score changes between groups. The intervention group demonstrated significant reduced CMAI non‐aggressive verbal agitation, MBI depersonalization, and psychotropic medication use (higher withdrawal rates and lower dosage increases) compared to the control group. NPI‐NH scores decreased less in the intervention group. DISCUSSION The I‐Learn program demonstrated potential for improving specific aspects of agitation in residents and well‐being in caregivers while significantly reducing psychotropic medication use. “I‐Learn Cognition and Behavior” is an easily accessible program with the potential for widespread distribution, contributing to improved well‐being and quality of care in long‐term care facilities for managing agitation in residents with neurocognitive disorders.

1 INTRODUCTION Neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS), such as agitation, are highly prevalent in neurocognitive disorders (NCDs) and represent a major source of distress for patients, caregivers, and long‐term care facilities (LTCFs). 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 Clinical guidelines strongly advocate for non‐pharmacological therapies (NPTs) as first‐line treatment, reserving drug treatment for second‐line use. 5 This priority is crucial because most psychotropic medications, including atypical antipsychotics, have an unfavorable risk–benefit profile. While they offer only slight agitation reduction, this marginal effect is counterbalanced by a significant 32% increased risk of serious adverse events, including mortality. 6 Consequently, regulatory bodies in the United States and several European countries actively discourage the routine use of antipsychotics in LTCFs, designating their use as a key quality indicator. 7 , 8 Non‐pharmacological approaches to NPS fall into three areas: patient‐centered, environmental, and caregiver‐focused interventions. While psychoeducational training for family caregivers successfully reduces NPS in home settings, 9 , 10 its effectiveness among staff in LTCFs is less robust. 11 , 12 Crucially, no previous study has evaluated a staff training program that integrates both e‐learning and simulation to measure the impact on resident and caregiver outcomes in the LTCF setting. Our team has developed the “I‐Learn Cognition and Behavior” program, a non‐pharmacological training program designed to assist LTCF staff in managing agitation in residents with NCDs. This program aims to equip LTCF staff with the theoretical knowledge and practical skills to effectively manage agitation through a blended learning approach. The “I‐Learn” program comprises two distinct phases. The first phase consists of three e‐learning modules covering (1) NCDs; (2) NPS, with a specific focus on agitation; and (3) evidence‐based non‐pharmacological management strategies. These modules were designed to be engaging through the use of multimedia content, clinical case studies, and knowledge‐check quizzes. The second phase emphasizes practical application through health simulation techniques, including realistic role‐playing exercises. This hands‐on component allows LTCF staff to apply the theoretical knowledge gained in the e‐learning modules and develop essential skills for effectively managing agitation in real‐world clinical settings. To our knowledge, the “I‐Learn Cognition and Behavior” program is the first psychoeducational program specifically designed for LTCF staff that integrates both e‐learning and health simulation to address agitation in individuals with NCDs. The primary objective of this study was to assess the efficacy of the “I‐Learn Cognition and Behavior” program in reducing agitation in residents with NCDs exhibiting agitation within LTCFs. This evaluation was conducted using a multicenter cluster‐randomized trial design with a 10‐month follow‐up period. Secondary objectives included: (1) assessing the effect of the training on the overall range of NPS, (2) evaluating the impact of the training on the quality of life of residents and well‐being of caregivers, (3) examining the influence of the training on the use of psychotropic medications, and (4) investigating the effect of the training on the number of resident hospitalizations. 2 METHODS 2.1 LTCFs—centers The study was conducted in 12 LTCFs equally distributed across three cities in France (four LTCFs each in Tours, Rennes, and Nantes). LTCFs eligible for the study had to meet the following criteria: (1) have at least 20 residents likely to meet the inclusion criteria, (2) have a maximum of 50 caregivers in their facility, (3) a referent willing to lead the project, and (4) computer equipment connected to the internet. Only management professionals were informed of the purpose of the study. Other professionals in the facility were informed that a research project was being implemented on behavioral disorders in LTCF residents. 2.2 Participants—residents The coordinating physicians and project referents within the institutions were tasked with preselecting residents who had to meet the following inclusion criteria: (1) a diagnosis of major neurocognitive disorder according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th Edition, (2) agitation with a score of ≥ 4 on the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) agitation item, and (3) informed of and verified to be non‐opposed to the study (legal guardians performed this task for residents under legal protection; see section 2.3 for more information about this criteria). 2.3 Design of the study The study design was a cluster randomized trial, meaning that randomization was performed not on the participants directly but on a cluster, in this case the LTCFs. The full protocol is in Supplementary Material 1 in supporting information. Randomization of LTCFs was conducted after the inclusion of residents and baseline assessments. For each of the three cities, two LTCFs were assigned to the control group and the two others to the intervention group. Before the randomization, professionals from the LCTFs participating in the trial were informed that a study on behavioral disorders would take place within the institution. Project leaders in the experimental group were notified of the immediate implementation of the “I‐Learn” training within their institution. Project leaders in the control groups were also informed of their group assignment and were encouraged to maintain their institution's standard care practices. This prospective study included a 10‐month follow‐up period with four data collection points for outcome measures: baseline, 3, 6, and 10 months. Upon conclusion of the project period, the control group LTCFs were provided with the option to access and implement the I‐Learn program. RESEARCH IN CONTEXT Systematic review : A systematic review (using traditional sources—e.g., PubMed) of nursing home staff training revealed limited, methodologically weak studies with feasibility and reproducibility concerns. Notably, no prior research evaluated programs combining e‐learning and simulation. Interpretation : The “I‐Learn Cognition and Behavior” program shows promise for improving well‐being and quality of care in managing agitation for residents with neurocognitive disorders, notably through a reduction in psychotropic medication use. Future directions : Future research could support the widespread implementation of this innovative and well‐received approach to enhance resident care and caregiver well‐being, and reduce reliance on psychotropic medications in nursing homes. From a regulatory standpoint in France, the I‐Learn study was considered non‐interventional and thus exempt from the strict requirements of the loi Jardé governing biomedical research. This classification was primarily because the intervention was delivered to staff members rather than directly to the residents. Consequently, legal requirements stipulated that authorization be based on the provision of information and the possibility of opposition, rather than requiring formal informed consent. While formal written consent was not required under the study's non‐interventional regulatory status, all residents and their legal representatives were fully briefed on the study's objectives and the intended use of clinical data. Furthermore, they were explicitly informed of their right to object to this procedure; as such, they maintained a permanent right to opt out at any time without justification. This approach is consistent with the guidance provided in The Ottawa Statement on the Ethical Design and Conduct of Cluster Randomized Trials. 13 The study received a favorable ethical opinion (number 2020_070) and was registered on ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT049371270). We acknowledge that approximations occurred during the ClinicalTrials.gov registration due to the confusion between the study's regulatory status and its methodological design. Three main discrepancies resulted: (1) the study was incorrectly registered as observational (regulatory view) instead of interventional (methodological view); (2) the primary outcome was incorrectly listed to include all Cohen–Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI) time points, whereas the correct outcome was the change between baseline and 10 months only; and (3) the follow‐up period was extended to 10 months (from 9 months) due to logistical changes caused by the COVID‐19 pandemic. 2.4 The intervention: the I‐Learn Cognition and Behavior program for LTCF staff The I‐Learn program's full description and Template for Intervention Description and Replication (TIDieR) Checklist are in Supplementary Materials 2 and 3 in supporting information, respectively. Video excerpts illustrating the e‐learning modules are in Supplementary Video 1 in supporting information. 2.5 Outcome measures Resident assessments were conducted by three independent psychologist evaluators—one per study city—who remained blinded to group allocation. This evaluation period ran from November 8, 2021, to February 2, 2022. Each evaluator visited the LTCFs within their assigned city, interviewed on‐duty caregivers, and administered assessments. Outcome measures were assessed at four time points: M0 (baseline), M3 (post‐e‐learning), M6 (post‐practical training), and M10 (follow‐up). The causal logic for the intervention, justifying resident‐level outcomes, is detailed in the Theory of Change diagram (Supplementary Material 4 in supporting information). The primary outcome for agitation was the CMAI. 14 This 29‐item observer‐rated questionnaire evaluates the frequency of agitation symptoms across four dimensions (non‐aggressive physical, non‐aggressive verbal, physical aggression, and verbal aggression). Items are rated on a 7‐point Likert scale, resulting in a maximal score of 203. NPS were assessed using the NPI–Nursing Home (NPI‐NH). 15 This observer‐rated tool evaluates the frequency and severity of 10 behavioral domains and 2 neurovegetative variables. Scores are the product of frequency (1–4) and severity (1–3), yielding a maximum total score of 144. It also captures the impact on care teams (maximum score of 60). Quality of life was measured using the Quality of Life in Alzheimer's Disease (QOL‐AD) scale 16 (13 items, 1–4 scale, max score 52). Missing data (1 or 2 points) were replaced by the average of the other items; 17 otherwise, the total score was considered missing. Caregiver burnout was assessed using the Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI) 18 at M0, M6, and M10. The MBI's 22 items (rated 0–6) cover three dimensions: emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and personal accomplishment. Scores were not calculated if any item within a dimension was missing. To assess the potential impact of the training on psychotropic medication use, prescriptions were collected at each visit. For each medication class (antipsychotics, anxiolytics, and antidepressants), the following criteria were considered: (1) the number of residents who discontinued treatment at least once during the follow‐up period (among those receiving medication at baseline) and (2) the evolution of medication dosages over time. For antipsychotics, anxiolytics, and antidepressants, dosages were converted to equivalent doses of olanzapine, fluoxetine, and diazepam, respectively. Residents who were not prescribed any medication at baseline were assigned a dosage of 0. Finally, the number, duration, and reasons for hospitalizations were recorded throughout the follow‐up period. 2.6 Statistical analysis The full statistical analysis plan is in Supplementary Material 5 in supporting information. We hypothesized a CMAI mean score at 10 months of 48 in the control group with a standard deviation of 16. 19 Assuming a power of 90%, a 5% two‐sided Type I error rate, 222 residents (111 per group) were needed to show a 7 point between‐group difference. This number was adjusted to 63 per group (total 126) by accounting for the repeated measures design (correlation coefficient of 0.25). 20 Finally, to adjust for the cluster randomized trial design (12 LTCFs) and assuming an intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) of 0.02, 21 the sample size was inflated to 14 residents per LTCF, for a total of 168 residents. All statistical tests were conducted at the 5% significance level. Residents were analyzed according to the randomized arm of their LTCF. The primary analysis used a linear mixed model (LMM) for repeated measures to compare CMAI score changes between groups over the 10‐month period (M0, M3, M6, and M10). The LMM included treatment group, visit, and their interaction as fixed effects, and incorporated random effects to account for clustering (LTCFs) and repeated measures within patients. All available CMAI measurements were used for the primary analysis. For secondary end points (NPI‐NH, QOL‐AD, MBI, and medication dosages), the same LMM strategy was used. Proportions (discontinuation or hospitalization) were compared using a logistic regression model with a random effect for clustering. Sensitivity analyses on CMAI subscales were performed as exploratory analyses. Analyses were conducted using SAS software (v9.4) and R software (v4.4.1). 22 3 RESULTS A total of 169 participants from 12 LTCFs were initially included in the study. Figure 1 provides a flowchart of the study. Of the 169 participants included in the analyses, 160 were assessed at M3, 137 at M6, and 127 at M10. Mortality was the primary reason for loss to follow‐up. Baseline characteristics of LTCFs and participants in the intervention and control groups are presented in Table 1 . The intervention implemented within the experimental group comprised online learning modules followed by three practical training sessions. A total of 209 professionals successfully completed the online modules. A total of 106 professionals participated in the practical sessions. Mean satisfaction scores (standard deviation) were 4.8/5 (0.4) for e‐learning ( n = 105 voters) and 4.3/5 (0.7) for practical training ( n = 70 voters). FIGURE 1 Flowchart of the study. TABLE 1 Baseline characteristics of long‐term care facilities, caregivers, and residents in the two groups. Values are expressed as mean ± standard deviation or n (%). LTCF characteristics Control group ( n = 6) Intervention group ( n = 6) Staff Total number of staff 49.3 ± 13.8 53.4 ± 13.5 Number of caregivers 30.5 ± 9.8 34.8 ± 10.9 Number of nurses 4.2 ± 1.2 5.5 ± 1.4 Number of nursing assistants 15.0 ± 4.4 20.5 ± 9.3 Number of psychosocial care workers 2.4 ± 1.5 2.2 ± 0.8 Number of geriatric care assistants 6.3 ± 2.8 3.3 ± 2.5 Working time Medical coordinator FTE 0.5 ± 0.6 0.5 ± 0.2 Psychologist FTE 0.4 ± 0.3 0.7 ± 0.2 Psychomotor therapist FTE — 0.4 ± 0.2 Occupational therapist FTE 0.6 ± 0.8 0.8 ± 0.2 Art therapist FTE — 0.2 Adapted physical activity educator FTE 0.3 0.4 NPTs Music therapy 6 (100%) 6 (100%) Cooking therapy 5 (83%) 4 (67%) Snoezelen 3 (50%) 4 (67%) Light therapy 0 (0) 1 (17%) Therapeutic garden 2 (33%) 2 (33%) Animal‐assisted therapy 4 (67%) 3 (50%) Aromatherapy 2 (33%) 3 (50%) Doll therapy 4 (67%) 5 (83%) Reminiscence therapy 3 (50%) 5 (83%) Therapeutic robot 1 (17%) 1 (17%) Manipulative tactile support 3 (50%) 4 (67%) Training for staff Training in neurodegenerative disorders 2 (33%) 2 (33%) Training by psychologist 2 (33%) 2 (33%) NPT training 2 (33%) 2 (33%) Geriatric care assistant 2 (33%) 0 LTCF staff characteristics Control group n = 171 Intervention group n = 189 Age 41.4 ± 10.7 39.7 ± 11.1 Women 151 (88%) 171 (91%) Positions Nurses 20 (12%) 20 (11%) Nursing assistants 68 (40%) 98 (52%) Medical‐psychological assistant 10 (6%) 15 (8%) Health‐care service worker 54 (32%) 42 (22%) Management 3 (2%) 1 (1%) Cross‐functional staff 12 (7%) 12 (6%) Other 4 (2%) 1 (1%) Professional experience in nursing home, years 10.1 ± 8.2 9.5 ± 8.3 Resident characteristics Control group, n = 83 Intervention group, n = 86 Age 86.7 ± 8.6 88.1 ± 6.6 Women 63 (76%) 60 (70%) Neurocognitive disorder etiology Alzheimer's disease 18 (22%) 36 (42%) Lewy body disease 3 (4%) 2 (2%) Frontotemporal degeneration 2 (2%) 3 (3%) Subcortical degeneration 3 (4%) 6 (7%) Vascular and mixed disease 16 (20%) 21 (24%) Undetermined 40 (49%) 18 (21%) CIRS total score 12.0 ± 4.8 9.5 ± 4.8 Antipsychotics 18 (23%) 22 (27%) Dosage, equivalent olanzapine, and mg 5.7 ± 9.3 1.6 ± 1.0 Antidepressants 31 (40%) 37 (46%) Dosage, equivalent fluoxetine, and mg 19.7 ± 9.4 19.4 ± 9.7 Anxiolytics 33 (43%) 36 (44%) Dosage, equivalent diazepam, and mg 9.0 ± 9.0 6.6 ± 3.6 CMAI total score 59.9 ± 18.3 63.0 ± 16.9 CMAI non‐aggressive physical agitation 29.5 ± 11.4 31.0 ± 10.4 CMAI non‐aggressive verbal agitation 8.5 ± 4.0 8.8 ± 4.3 CMAI physical agitation and aggression 14.0 ± 7.2 14.2 ± 7.3 CMAI verbal agitation and aggression 7.9 ± 4.1 9.0 ± 4.3 NPI total score 44.7 ± 23.4 35.1 ± 16.7 NPI agitation 7.8 ± 4.4 6.9 ± 3.6 NPI delusions 3.6 ± 4.5 2.1 ± 3.7 NPI hallucinations 1.3 ± 2.7 0.8 ± 2.0 NPI depression 4.3 ± 4.7 3.3 ± 4.3 NPI anxiety 5.3 ± 5.0 3.4 ± 4.1 NPI euphoria 0.5 ± 1.5 0.3 ± 1.1 NPI apathy 3.3 ± 4.9 3.1 ± 4.6 NPI disinhibition 2.9 ± 4.0 1.9 ± 3.2 NPI irritability 5.4 ± 4.9 4.5 ± 4.0 NPI aberrant motor behavior 4.2 ± 4.7 4.5 ± 4.5 NPI sleep disorder 3.1 ± 4.3 2.2 ± 3.6 NPI appetite disorder 2.9 ± 4.5 2.2 ± 3.8 Abbreviations: CIRS, Comorbidity Illness Rating Scale; CMAI, Cohen–Mansfield Agitation Inventory; FTE, full‐time equivalent; LTCF, long‐term care facility; NPI, Neuropsychiatric Inventory; NPT, non‐pharmacological therapy. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd. Figure 2 and Supplementary Material 6 in supporting information depict the changes in CMAI total and subscale scores across the study time points (baseline, 3, 6, and 10 months) for both the intervention and control groups. Both groups demonstrated a similar decrease in CMAI total scores over time. No significant group differences were observed at any follow‐up visit: M3 ( β = −0.4, 95% confidence interval [CI]: −4.9–4.1, P = 0.86), M6 ( β = 2.0, 95% CI: −3.5–7.5, P = 0.47), and M10 ( β = 1.9, 95% CI: −3.1–6.9, P = 0.45). FIGURE 2 Mean changes in Cohen–Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI) total score and its four subscales across study visits (baseline, month 3, month 6, and month 10) for the intervention (red triangles) and control (green circles) groups. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Regarding CMAI subscales, a significant group effect was found for non‐aggressive verbal agitation. Specifically, the decrease in non‐aggressive verbal agitation scores from baseline to 10 months was significantly greater in the intervention group compared to the control group ( β = –1.3, 95% CI: −2.7 to −0.02, P = 0.047). No other significant between‐group differences were observed for the remaining CMAI subscales. Figure 3 and Supplementary Material 7 in supporting information depict the changes in NPI‐NH total scores, NPI‐NH agitation and distress subscores, and QOL‐AD scores across the study time points. The decrease from baseline in the NPI total score was significantly greater in the control group compared to the intervention group at the M3 ( β = 8.1, 95% CI: 2.6–13.5, P = 0.004), M6 ( β = 12.7, 95% CI: 6.3–19.0, P &lt; 0.001), and M10 ( β = 9.7, 95% CI: 3.6–15.8, P = 0.002). Similarly, significant decreases from baseline were observed in the NPI agitation and distress subscores in the control group compared to the intervention group at each follow‐up visit, with the exception of the distress subscale at M3 ( P = 0.361). No significant between‐group differences were observed in the changes of QOL‐AD at any of the follow‐up visits. FIGURE 3 Mean changes in Neuropsychiatric Inventory‐Nursing Home (NPI‐NH) total and agitation/distress subscores, and Quality of Life in Alzheimer's Disease (QOL‐AD) scores across study visits (baseline, month 3, month 6, and month 10) for the intervention (red triangles) and control (green circles) groups. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Supplementary Materials 8 in supporting information provide detailed information on medication use in both groups, including psychotropic medication prescriptions and deprescriptions, dosage changes across study visits, and statistical details for odds ratio (OR) calculations. A significantly higher proportion of participants in the intervention group experienced at least one withdrawal of anxiolytics compared to the control group, among participants taking anxiolytics at baseline (OR = 2.9, 95% CI: 1.2–7.0, P = 0.02), as determined by mixed‐effects logistic regression. A similar trend was observed for antidepressant withdrawal, with a higher proportion in the intervention group (OR = 3.3, 95% CI: 0.96–11.0, P = 0.058). While a higher proportion of participants in the intervention group also experienced antipsychotic withdrawal, this difference did not reach statistical significance (OR = 3.7, 95% CI: 0.4–32.5, P = 0.24). Dosage analyses revealed a trend toward stability or a decrease in psychotropic medication dosages within the intervention group, whereas an increase in medication dosages was observed within the control group. Statistically significant between‐group differences in medication dosage changes were found at M3 compared to baseline for antidepressants ( β = −2.2, 95% CI: −4.1 to −0.2, P = 0.03), and antipsychotics ( β = −1.0, 95% CI: −1.8 to −0.1, P = 0.03), and at M6 compared to baseline for anxiolytics ( β = −1.2, 95% CI: −2.3 to 0.0, P = 0.04) Regarding hospitalizations, no significant between‐group differences were observed in the occurrence of at least one hospitalization during the study. In both groups, 18 participants (22% in the intervention group and 23% in the control group) experienced at least one hospitalization (OR = 0.9, 95% CI: 0.5–1.8, P = 0.79). Regarding the caregivers’ quality of work life, Figure 4 and Supplementary Material 7 describe the changes in the subscale scores of the MBI during the different periods of the study. The intervention group demonstrated a significantly greater improvement in depersonalization scores at M10 compared to the control group ( β = −1.7, 95% CI: −3.3 to −0.1, P = 0.036). FIGURE 4 Mean changes in Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI) subscale scores across study visits (baseline, month 6, and month 10) for the intervention (red triangles) and control (green circles) groups. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals (CIs). 4 DISCUSSION This cluster‐randomized controlled trial implemented the “I‐Learn Cognition and Behavior” program in LTCFs, designed to equip staff with knowledge and skills for managing agitation in residents with NCDs. Although the program showed no overall impact on agitation (CMAI total score) compared to usual care, post hoc analyses identified a significant reduction in non‐aggressive verbal agitation. This subscale includes behaviors like repetition of words, sentences, and verbal demands. Non‐aggressive verbal agitation, though distressing, may be perceived differently than physical aggression. Intervention staff likely interpreted these verbalizations as non‐intentional neurological manifestations, shifting their approach. This finding is particularly notable given that a recent brexpiprazole RCT 23 showed efficacy across other CMAI subscales but not for non‐aggressive verbal agitation. This suggests the I‐Learn program offers a complementary, non‐pharmacological approach to managing specific agitation domains that medications may not fully address. Surprisingly, the decrease in NPI total, agitation, and distress scores was significantly more pronounced in the control group. This unexpected finding may stem from several factors, primarily observer bias. The I‐Learn program's intensive training increased staff awareness regarding NPS, their detection, and management. This heightened sensitivity may have led intervention staff to become more attuned to subtle behavioral changes, potentially inflating their NPI ratings even if the actual symptom severity remained constant. The use of the NPI as both an outcome measure and an intervention component further risks introducing this bias. A second potential explanation relates to baseline imbalance. Because the control group exhibited substantially higher NPI scores at baseline, they were naturally susceptible to greater spontaneous symptom fluctuations, potentially resulting in a larger observed decrease over time regardless of the intervention. Finally, a confounding effect from psychotropic medication reduction cannot be excluded. The intervention group experienced a significantly larger decrease in psychotropic prescriptions and dosage. This reduction may have counteracted the beneficial effects of the I‐Learn program on NPI‐NH scores, thereby artificially diminishing the difference observed between the two groups. Interestingly, the I‐Learn program demonstrated a significant reduction in the use of psychotropic medications among participants. Specifically, we observed a three‐fold increase in the withdrawal of psychotropic medications in the intervention group compared to the control group, with statistically significant effects observed for anxiolytics and a trend toward significance for antidepressants. Furthermore, psychotropic medication dosages remained stable or even decreased in the intervention group, while an increase in dosage was observed in the control group. This finding is particularly noteworthy given that the study period coincided with the COVID‐19 pandemic and associated lockdowns, a period known for increased psychotropic medication use in LTCFs. 24 The I‐Learn program may have mitigated this increase by equipping LTCF staff with non‐pharmacological strategies to manage agitation effectively, potentially reducing the reliance on psychotropic medications during periods of heightened stress. These findings support the growing body of evidence that emphasizes the importance of non‐pharmacological interventions, such as caregiver training programs, in managing agitation in residents with NCDs. Guidelines for the management of NPS in dementia strongly advocate for the optimization of psychotropic medication use, emphasizing the need to minimize potential adverse effects, including serious side effects such as falls, stroke, and death. 5 The I‐Learn program demonstrates a promising approach to achieving this goal by empowering LTCF staff with the knowledge and skills to effectively manage agitation without relying heavily on medications. No significant improvement was observed regarding the quality of life of the residents. However, there is a significant effect of the intervention on the well‐being of health‐care professionals, and more specifically on the depersonalization subscale of the MBI. This subscale measures the degree of insensitive and impersonal reactions toward the residents. A decrease in this score in the intervention group suggests that the I‐Learn program promoted an increase in empathy and compassion for residents suffering from agitation and non‐communicable diseases. Previous publications have investigated the benefits of staff training interventions for NPS in LTCFs, although our study is the first to investigate the benefits of a training program combining e‐learning and simulation. A recent randomized controlled trial examined the iWHELD digital care program in nursing homes, reporting significant improvements in resident quality of life and reduced psychotropic use, but no effect on agitation. 25 While our study's findings partially align with the iWHELD results regarding psychotropic reduction, we observed differences. Despite the iWHELD study's larger scale (149 nursing homes), our trial featured a longer follow‐up (10 months vs. 4 months) and incorporated in‐person simulation workshops alongside the digital intervention. These methodological variations may explain the discrepancies in our findings. More broadly, a recent review identified ten categories of interventions, with three demonstrating the most promising results for both residents and staff: structured protocols and models, person‐centered bathing, and communication techniques. 11 Notably, the I‐Learn program incorporates elements from these effective categories, including not only person‐centered care and communication strategies but also concept mapping, case conferences, and emotion‐oriented approaches. Based on the findings of the review, future research could explore supplementing the I‐Learn program with structured protocols and education on psychotropic medication use to potentially optimize training outcomes. Study limitations include inherent methodological challenges when working in LTCFs. First, attrition bias is a concern due to relatively high resident mortality; future studies could mitigate this risk using an open‐cohort design. 26 Second, the number of health‐care professionals fully trained was significantly reduced (halved) between the e‐learning and simulation phases. This was likely due to contextual factors, including the COVID‐19 pandemic and staff absenteeism/resignations. Future non‐pharmacological trials need staggered training timelines to ensure maximal staff participation. Third, while the CMAI was the primary outcome, its assessment of a construct partially targeted by the intervention may introduce bias; future research should incorporate more objective outcomes, such as changes in medication use (withdrawal or dosage reduction). Finally, the generalizability of our findings is limited. The study involved only 12 LTCFs located in three French cities. The specific criteria used for facility selection (e.g., maximum 50 caregivers, computer equipment) may also restrict the applicability of results. Future research should aim to validate the I‐Learn program's effectiveness across a broader and more diverse range of LTCF settings. 5 CONCLUSION The “I‐Learn Behavior and Cognition” program demonstrated the potential to reduce certain aspects of agitation in residents, improve LTCF staff well‐being, and substantially decrease the use of psychotropic medications. By effectively combining e‐learning and simulation, this program offers several advantages over traditional staff training methods, including enhanced accessibility, increased flexibility, and the integration of both theoretical and practical knowledge. This innovative approach, with high satisfaction ratings, can be easily and rapidly implemented across LTCFs, facilitating improved resident care, enhanced LTCF staff well‐being, and alignment with institutional strategies such as limiting the use of psychotropic medications. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Conceptualization and funding acquisition: C.L., V.C., and T.D.; psychometric assessment: S.P., V.B., and C.R.; statistics: J.L.; writing—original draft preparation: C.L., A.L., and T.D.; writing—review &amp; editing: all authors. CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT C.L., A.L., and A.C. received a salary from the “Agence Régionale de Santé Centre‐Val de Loire” for the development and dissemination of the I‐Learn program. T.D. holds shares in Synpatys Neuroscience and has received personal fees from Janssen and Lundbeck. All other authors declare no competing interests. Author disclosures are available in the supporting information . CONSENT STATEMENT Full written consent from residents was not required. Instead, residents and relatives received information about the study and their right to object (a procedure known as non‐opposition). From the French regulatory perspective, the study was deemed non‐interventional (outside the scope of the loi Jardé) because the I‐Learn program was administered exclusively to staff and not directly to the residents. Supporting information Supplementary Video 1 : Selected excerpts from the I‐Learn program's e‐learning modules. Supplementary Material 2 Supplementary Material 3 Supplementary Material 4 Supplementary Material 5 Supplementary Material 6 Supplementary Material 7 Supplementary Material 8 Supplementary Material 9 Supporting Information Supporting Information