Multiscale metabolic covariance networks uncover stage‐specific biomarker signatures across the Alzheimer's disease continuum

Abstract INTRODUCTION Functional connectomics studies leverage the power of interregional brain relationships using graph theory of glycolytic metabolism to establish neural connections and their roles in cognition and disease and to monitor therapeutic responses. METHODS Using a retrospective clinical population ( N = 431) from ADNI, we evaluated disease changes using metabolic covariance analysis. In addition, we developed a novel region set enrichment analysis (RSEA) to detect brain functional changes based on metabolic variations. Results were aligned with transcriptomic signatures and clinical cognitive assessments (CCAs). RESULTS Our findings highlight sexual dimorphic changes across the disease spectrum, which suggest brain network reorganization occurs as compensatory mechanisms due to pathological disruptions. RSEA indicated functional changes in motor, memory, language, and cognitive functions related to disease progression, and these changes were supported by transcriptomic signatures. DISCUSSION Together, metabolic covariance analysis, regional connectomics, and RSEA allow for AD progression tracking and functional alteration identification based on metabolic readouts, consistent with CCA.

1 BACKGROUND Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related dementias (ADRD) are a suite of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by progressive cognitive decline, affecting 6.9 million people in the United States and projected to grow to 13.8 million by 2060. 1 Despite extensive research, the causes of ADRD remains unclear, warranting continued investigation. 1 Recent studies suggest that the accumulation of amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques and hyperphosphorylated tau tangles leads to neuroinflammation, oxidative stress, metabolic dysregulation, synaptic disruption, and neuronal dysfunction, which in turn leads to cognitive decline, brain network disruption, and neurodegeneration. 2 Metabolic reprogramming theory 3 suggests that energy defects during aging cause metabolic dysregulation in neurons and astrocytes, 3 impacting neuronal bioenergetic viability, while aging impacts the long‐term efficiency of energy production. 3 Under these conditions, enzymatic decline during aging leads to dysregulation and, ultimately, neuronal degeneration. 3 Moreover, the theory proposes that increases in energy demand are compensated by the inverse Warburg effect (upregulation of oxidative phosphorylation activity in neurons) and the Warburg effect (upregulation of glycolysis in astrocytes). 3 Under normal circumstances, the brain meets its energy requirements through a constant supply of glucose and oxygen via blood flow, a process termed neurovascular coupling. 4 , 5 However, under stress conditions, the Warburg and inverse Warburg processes increase lactate production as a compensatory mechanism to support neurons with adequate energy. 3 Support for this premise comes from work in our lab, which has shown in human apolipoprotein E ( APOE) ε4/ε4 mouse models, that depending on genetics, age, and sex, metabolism is dysregulated with respect to blood flow. 6 Similarly, recent work from our lab in humans, with a wide array of genetics, ages, sexes, and disease show a striking similarity with AD mouse biology, supporting this premise. 4 The use of glycolytic positron emission tomography (PET) 2‐Deoxy‐2‐[18F] fluoroglucose ( 18 F‐FDG) imaging has proven useful in predicting and diagnosing ADRD, 7 where early prodromal stages show hypermetabolism, 8 , 9 while regional hypometabolism is observed in key brain areas at later stages of the disease. 10 , 11 Additionally, recent studies using 18 F‐FDG as a metabolic imaging biomarker 12 showed that disease progression impacted brain connectivity networks, 13 resulting in default mode network variations (i.e., increases/decreases at different disease stages) 14 and AD‐related patterns. 12 Recent connectomics modeling studies 8 , 13 have shown that brain network organization, structure, and function can identify alterations associated with neurological and psychiatric disorders 15 and establish how neural connections contribute to cognitive decline and disease progression. 15 Consequently, connectomics has enhanced our understanding of brain networks by enabling the analysis of inter‐regional relationships through graph theory and network connectivity beyond simple regional comparisons. 16 Moreover, these connectomics relationships derived through metabolic imaging biomarkers are referred to as metabolic connectivity networks 17 and provide detailed insights into how brain regions coordinate activity to support complex behaviors. Preclinical and clinical studies 8 , 13 , 18 on metabolic connectivity in neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD, have reported alterations in metabolic connectivity networks (e.g., whole brain entropy, connection strength, clustering coefficients) associated with functional connectivity changes, thereby supporting brain reprogramming 3 and energy failure 19 theories. Although brain connectomics is a major research field in neuroscience, molecular imaging is not widely used due to the dominance of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in neuroimaging. 17 Hence, current brain connectivity networks, based on MRI modalities (i.e., BOLD, diffusion MRI, fMRI), limits our understanding of inter‐regional brain connectivity, since T2/T2* signal changes are driven by blood volume as a metabolic surrogate 20 ; however, this overlooks the complex biochemical processes and electrical signaling related to brain activity. 17 Therefore, in this study, we explored metabolic connectomics changes across the AD spectrum, ranging from cognitively normal (CN) to AD, using 18 F‐FDG as a metabolic surrogate 12 and network covariance analysis. To quantify brain functional changes in these networks, we developed novel region‐set enrichment analysis (RSEA) to examine these measures. Moreover, we extended network metrics by computing functional path lengths, permitting detection of network remodeling and change in network efficiency over the disease spectrum. Therefore, we hypothesized that inter‐regional alterations in the metabolic connectivity networks across the disease spectrum would contribute to cognitive functional decline and disease, thereby allowing the use of a sensitive and specific method to assess disease progression, patient stratification, and therapeutic response. 2 METHODS 2.1 Dataset The data used in the preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). The ADNI was launched in 2003 as a public–private partnership, led by Principal Investigator Michael W. Weiner, MD. The primary goal of ADNI has been to test whether serial MRI, PET, other biological markers, and clinical and neuropsychological assessment can be combined to measure the progression of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and early AD. 21 For up‐to‐date information see www.adni‐info.org . Specifically, we mined data from ADNI phases 2 and 3 for subjects scanned with 18 F‐FDG PET and clinical cognitive assessment (CCA) results for Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale‐Cognitive Subscale (ADAS‐Cog), Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR), and Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) within 180 days. A total of 431 cases were obtained, which retained the following split: 98 CN, 76 early MCI (EMCI), 129 MCI, 42 late MCI (LMCI), and 86 AD. The disease stage classifications were obtained from clinical assessments as part of ADNI, and each subject belonged only to one group. The age range of the subjects was from 55 to 95 years with an average age of 73.60 ± 7.44 years, and the sex split between the cases were 55% for males and 45% for females. In addition, vitals (age, height, weight) and APOE genotypes for these subjects were obtained. A subpopulation of 116 cases (CN = 77; MCI = 18; AD = 21), had Genome‐Wide Association Studies and gene expression profiles available. The APOE distribution was 6.73% for APOE ε2 (ε2/ε2 and ε2/ε3), 61.48% for APOE ε3 homozygotes (ε3/ε3), and 31.79% for APOE ε4 (ε2/ε4, ε3/ε4 and ε4/ε4). For complete demographics, see Table S1 . 2.2 Image preprocessing To evaluate regional cerebral glycolysis, glucose uptake was measured via 18 F‐FDG PET as surrogate biomarker readout for glycolytic metabolism. 12 PET images were acquired and reconstructed using standard parameters (Table S2 ) developed by ADNI. 21 To permit direct comparison in a common reference space (i.e., Montreal Neurological Institute [MNI] + Harvard‐Oxford Cortical + subcortical [RRID: SCR_001476] + FSL Probabilistic Cerebellar Atlases; MNI152+), all images were co‐registered using a 3D deformable registration based on total variation developed by our lab. 22 For a list of brain regions and indices, see Table S3 . RESEARCH‐IN‐CONTEXT Systematic review : The authors conducted a comprehensive connectomics analysis of 18F‐FDG PET images, revealing brain network restructuring and metabolic dysregulation in AD. Previous brain connectomics studies focused on MRI; however, the use of PET imaging to understand brain connectivity in AD has been largely overlooked. Analyses and reviews of relevant studies are appropriately cited. Interpretation : Our findings highlight the variations in brain metabolic connectomics properties relative to disease progression, where distinct and opposite sex‐dependent patterns were identified. These changes suggest brain restructuring in connectivity networks, as well as alterations in communication efficiency and functional variations between regions, which may contribute to cognitive decline. Future directions : Our study demonstrates the value of analyzing metabolic readouts to assess alterations in brain organization and function via brain connectomics. Moreover, our findings underscore the importance of integrating multimodal data for understanding disease progression and identifying the potential to evaluate therapeutics. After registration, mean intensities for 59 unilateral brain regions were extracted via the MNI152+ atlas for the 18 F‐FDG images. Typically, regional analysis utilizes standardized uptake values (SUV), assuming body mass may serve as a reasonable proxy for the tracer volume distribution; however, this assumption cannot be met for all subjects in an aging study whose body mass and composition are non‐uniform. 23 , 24 To overcome these limitations, SUVRs have been used, which represent tracer uptake as a ratio of the region/volume of interest to a reference structure (e.g., cerebellum, whole brain). 25 In the case of ADRD studies, where disease progression is non‐uniform throughout the brain, the selection of a reference region may bias interpretations 26 ; therefore, to eliminate this bias, SUVRs have been computed relative to whole brain. 25 In the current study, SUVRs were computed as follows: S U V R s , R = R s W B s where s , R , and W B denote the subject, mean value of the region/volume of interest for subject s , and whole‐brain mean value for subject s , respectively. For each regional SUVR, values were converted to z ‐scores relative to the CN population as follows: z − score S U V R s , R = S U V R s , R − μ p o p R σ p o p R where s , R , μ p o p , and σ p o p are the subject, region/volume of interest, mean SUVR of the reference population, and standard deviation of the reference population, respectively. The z ‐score SUVRs are used to calculate and determine the significance of each region across the disease stages using Student's t ‐test with p &lt; 0.05. 2.3 Metabolic connectomics analysis Metabolic covariance analysis was conducted in MATLAB 2024b to evaluate whole‐brain and subnetwork changes in the metabolic covariance networks. The following open‐source packages were used: Brain Connectivity Toolbox (BCT), 27 generalized Louvain modularity, 28 hierarchical consensus clustering, 29 and CovNet developed by our lab. 8 Following our previous preclinical work, metabolic covariance networks were computed for five disease stage groups (CN, EMCI, MCI, LMCI, AD) across subjects within the group. The resulting covariance network matrix for each group resulted in a region‐by‐region (59 × 59 region) adjacency matrix that indicates the degree of similarity of regional 18 F‐FDG readout among all region pairs. Two covariance network variants were generated: weighted unthresholded networks (WUNs) and weighted thresholded networks (WTNs) at p &lt; 0.05 correlation significance using CovNet. 8 Using the BCT, 27 the following network measures were computed on WTNs for each disease stage: network density (number of connections), node degree (number of connections for each region), positive and negative nodal strengths (sum of the positive/negative covariance values for each region), and clustering coefficient (number of fully connected triangles around a node based on the weight and sign of the connections). 30 Community detection, or modularity maximization, is the process of identifying groups of nodes in a network with greater intragroup connectivity than intergroup connectivity. In this study, this process is performed using multiresolution consensus clustering (MRCC), 29 which identifies communities across spatial scales and quantitatively determines a consensus partition from the set. MRCC was applied to the WUN as they contain the most information. These derived consensus partitions were used to investigate differences between the modules obtained for each group, based on their metabolic SUVRs, modules obtained from the CN group for males and females, and were used to analyze disease progression. 2.4 Metabolic shortest‐path analysis WTNs were separated into two adjacency matrices, one for each: positive and negative correlations. Under the assumption that these matrices can be viewed as undirected graphs, using the absolute values of the entries of these matrices, we obtained the positive and negative shortest‐path trees between all pair‐wise combinations of regions using Dijkstra's algorithm. Although shortest‐path analysis has been reserved for structural connectomics, which is analogous to measuring the shortest distance between nodal pairs, 15 this measure is thought to represent the most efficient routes of information exchange between brain regions 31 , 32 and is analogous to the length of the wires connecting nodes in a network. However, in the context of metabolic networks, this measure represents metabolic interactions that minimizes the number of functional steps to link nodal pairs and elucidates how metabolic process disturbances propagate through the network 33 and are therefore more analogous to the voltage across a given wire. As such, the shortest paths between regions were ordered into a 59 × 59 metabolic distance matrix (MDM), where the upper triangular part (UMDM) represents the positive path lengths between regions and the lower triangular part (LMDM) represents the negative path lengths between regions. This can be described by the following: MDM i , j = 0 if i = j MDM i , j = d G POS , i , j for i &lt; j MDM i , j = d G NEG , i , j for i &gt; j where i indexes i th the brain region, j the j th brain region, M D M ( i , j ) the entry ( i , j ) of the MDM, G POS the undirected graph using the positive values of the WTN, and G NEG the undirected graph using the absolute value of the negative values of the WTN, and d is the shortest distance between region i and region j for graph G using Dijkstra's algorithm. In addition, to understand the network balance between positive and negative pathways, differences between positive and negative shortest‐path trees were computed. An inter‐regional path length comparison was performed to determine the difference between disease stage groups to evaluate the effect of disease progression in path lengths. 2.5 Region set enrichment analysis RSEA was developed to detect and quantify brain function changes based on metabolic variations. Note that, although we developed this method in the context of metabolic alterations, it can be translated to other readouts. This method weighs changes in each region and relates them to functional changes, which are split into 10 functional set enrichment categories (FSECs): auditory, autonomics, cognition, emotions, language, memory, motor, sensorial, speech, and visual. A 59 × 10 matrix is generated, where the columns represent the FSEC and rows the brain regions. For each brain region, a column is assigned a value of 1 if the brain region is related to the relevant FSEC; otherwise, it is assigned a value of 0. (The list of functions by region plus literature references used to generate this matrix is found in Table S4 .) Then each value is normalized using the following equation: RSEA Matrix i , j = F N i , j N B R ∗ ∑ a = 1 N F S E C F N a , j where i indexes the brain region, j the FSEC, N B R the number of brain regions, N F S E C the number of FSEC, and F N ( i , j ) the ( i , j ) entry of the RSEA matrix. To perform RSEA, differences between SUVRs of each brain region relative to a reference group are multiplied elementwise across its corresponding RSEA matrix row. RSEA can be performed across multiple modalities: whole brain, regions clustered by significance, and regions clustered by connectomics modules. For the whole brain, a single score value for each FSEC was obtained by summing each column of the RSEA matrix. For regions clustered by significance, p values using Student's t ‐tests for each brain regions relative to CN were calculated for each disease stage. Regions were then divided into four quartiles. The smallest p value of each brain region for all stages was chosen, and regions were sorted from smallest to largest p value. Subsequently, the 59 brain regions were divided into quartiles. Tthe first quartile included regions 1 through 15, the second quartile regions 16 to 30, the third quartile regions 31 to 45, and the fourth quartile regions 46 to 59. For each quartile, a single score value for each FSEC was computed by summing the columns of each region. Similarly, for regions clustered by connectomics modules, the MRCC modules computed for the CN group were used to cluster the regions. The FSEC score was generated by summing the columns of the regions within the corresponding module. 2.6 Transcriptomics analysis The WGCNA algorithm 34 was employed to identify the gene co‐expression network, across blood samples, utilizing the following parameters: soft threshold power = 6, minimum module size = 30, merge cut height = 0.25. Key genes (hub genes) were identified from each module using a module eigengene (ME). In addition, Pearson correlations between ME and participant characteristics, including sex, 18 F‐FDG, and disease stage, were calculated. These module–trait associations are visualized via the ComplexHeatmap package in R. For detailed WGCNA procedures, refer to the Supplemental Methods . Functional annotations and enrichment analyses were performed using the bioconductor package clusterProfiler 35 in R. Gene Ontology (GO) terms were enriched using enrichGO, while Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis was performed using enrichKEGG. Enriched functional categories within gene modules were compared using compareCluster. A significance threshold of 0.05 was set for all enrichment analyses, utilizing Benjamini–Hochberg adjusted p values. The biological domains of Cary et al. 36 were used to perform functional enrichment analysis relative to AD to obtain AD‐associated endophenotypes. Subsequently, we conducted gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) 37 and categorized the results into biological domains and subdomains based on the GO ID of enriched terms via the “gseGO” function in the clusterProfiler R package. 35 For further details, refer to the Supplemental Methods . 2.7 Statistical significance Statistical analysis of significant brain regions was evaluated using Student's t ‐test ( p &lt; 0.05), without Bonferroni correction since regional independence was maintained (i.e., region “x” vs region “x” between experimental stage and the reference stage), 38 , 39 on the z ‐scored SUVRs relative to CN. The correlation between nodal measures, path metrics, and CCAs were aligned to evaluate their relationship across the disease spectrum, using Pearson's correlation and Student's t ‐test ( p &lt; 0.05). Nodal measures between groups were compared via two‐sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS), tests and RSEA module significance was determined via Student's t ‐test. 3 RESULTS Three‐dimensional image registration for all 18 F‐FDG images was evaluated using structural similarity index measure (SSIM) to assess the similarities in structural features between images and their registered version. Quality assurance was performed for all cases by a team of experts to ensure proper alignment and scan coverage. The average SSIM was 0.91 ± 0.04 for ( N = 431), indicating a high degree of alignment quality. 3.1 Metabolic covariance network analysis Covariance and connectomics analysis were used to assess network‐level metabolic changes. Figure S1 shows the unthresholded metabolic covariance matrices across the disease spectrum, with brain region names in Table S3 . As the disease progresses, the WTNs become sparse and fragmented, especially in females, as shown in Figure S2 . Network densities (Figure 1A ) measure the number of connections, with a density of 0 indicating no connections between nodes and 1 indicating a fully connected network (every node is connected to every other node in the network). At p &lt; 0.05, male node density oscillates between 0.3068 and 0.4664, while female node density ranges from 0.3010 to 0.3904. Both sexes show a consistent “W” pattern with disease stage, where the drop in node density occurs during transition stages (EMCI/LMCI). Comparing between CN, MCI, and AD, male node density increases as disease progresses, whereas female node density remains relatively constant. FIGURE 1 Properties of thresholded metabolic covariance networks and ordered multiresolution consensus clustering (MRCC) partitions across the disease spectrum. The following metrics were computed using thresholded metabolic covariance networks (MCNs) with p &lt; 0.05: (A) network densities, (B) degree distribution, (C) clustering coefficient, (D) positive nodal strength, and (E) negative nodal strength. These metrics show variations across the disease spectrum. Notably, while both sexes exhibit similar changes, when compared to the same disease stage, each sex displays alterations to a different extent. This suggests that the brain networks restructure at different rates, exhibiting dimorphism. (F–J) Ordered MRCC partitions for males. The number of modules varies across different disease stages: 10 for cognitively normal (CN), six for early mild cognitive impairment (EMCI), eight for MCI, six for LMCI, and three for AD. This suggests that brain regions reorganize as Alzheimer's disease (AD) progresses. In male cases, the network begins consolidating, which may be due to reduced functionality or a shift in metabolic demand priorities as an attempt to preserve balance in the brain. (K–O) Ordered MRCC partitions for females. The number of modules varies across disease stages: five for CN, 14 for EMCI, 13 for MCI, seven for LMCI, and 15 for AD. Females exhibit an increase in the number of modules, indicating a sexual dimorphism in network clustering compared to males, who show a decrease in modules. However, this suggests that the brain reorganization places more stress on female networks, leading to fragmentation. Consequently, the restructuring results in more specialized modules. Degree distribution (Figure 1B ) denotes the frequency of connections for a node and is used to detect network hubs. A greater number of highly connected nodes makes the network more heterogeneous and centralized. At p &lt; 0.05, the degree distribution for both sexes also shows a “W” pattern similar to node density. Both sexes experience a drop in the LMCI phase, suggesting reduced information exchange efficiency between brain regions. When comparing the significance between disease stages, seven out of 10 possible pairwise comparison for males and six out of 10 for females were significant. The clustering coefficient (Figure 1C ) measures how closely nodes cluster together, with 0 indicating no clustering and 1 indicating full connectivity. Thus, this measure represents the probability that two nodes are linked to a third node, where a high clustering coefficient implies fewer long‐range connections. At p &lt; 0.05, variations in clustering coefficients are observed across different diseases for both sexes, with higher clustering coefficients occurring at the late stages. Of these, eight out of 10 for males and seven out of 10 for females were significant. Positive and negative nodal strengths (Figure 1D,E ) represent the sum of positive or negative nodal weights. These metrics are utilized to assess the connections to other nodes, where high strengths indicate more central and influential impacts on nodes within the network. At p &lt; 0.05, changes in nodal strength are observed in both sexes across the disease spectrum, with both positive and negative strengths following a similar pattern. Table S5 shows the KS test comparisons of the network analysis measurements for all pairwise group combinations. For the positive nodal strength, four out of 10 for males and females were significant. Meanwhile, four out of 10 and three out of 10 were significant for males and females, respectively. 3.2 Modularity structure of metabolic covariance networks By employing a data‐driven approach with MRCC, using 10,000 permutations, consensus communities (modules) were identified for each unthresholded metabolic covariance network. The number of modules for males/females (Figure 1F–O ) was as follows: 10/5 for CN, 6/14 for EMCI, 8/13 for MCI, 6/7 for LMCI, and 3/15 for AD. This indicates the presence of a sexual dimorphism in the clustering of the networks, as the number of modules decreases for males while it increases for females. The number of modules can be used to assess the coherence among regions within the network, with a higher number of modules indicating a more disordered or fragmented network. This result suggests that the brain undergoes restructuring of the modules in relation to disease progression to maintain balance in the brain. 3.3 Shortest‐path distances Each entry ( i , j ) of the distance matrix (Figure S3 ) represents the shortest‐path length between regions for positive connections in the UMDM and negative connections in the LMDM. Values on the diagonal are set to 0 as they represent the path length of a region with itself. Qualitative analysis of these matrices across the disease spectrum indicates that the largest increase in distance occurs during the LMCI phase for both sexes. Quantitative analysis of distance matrices was performed using CN (Figure 2 ) as a common reference across all stages and the previous stage (Figure S4 ) to observe changes over disease progression. Both sexes showed similar patterns for the two references. Relative to CN, EMCI, LMCI, and AD had increased path lengths, while MCI had decreased path lengths. Relative to the previous stage, EMCI and LMCI had increased path lengths compared to their prior stages (CN and MCI, respectively), whereas MCI and AD had decreased path lengths compared to their prior stages (EMCI and LMCI, respectively). The varying path lengths across the disease spectrum suggest changes in energy expenditure and lowered efficiency. FIGURE 2 Comparisons of the pathways relative to cognitively normal (CN). Quantitative analysis comparing CN to each other disease stage reveals that early mild cognitive impairment (EMCI), late MCI (LMCI), and Alzheimer's disease have increased path lengths, while MCI has shown a decrease. Typically, an increase in path length indicates less efficient networks, while a decrease suggests more efficient networks. However, in this case, the MCI increase is attributed to the larger metabolic demand, which makes the network appear more efficient despite consuming more energy. Consequently, these changes in path lengths across the disease spectrum suggest alterations in energy expenditure and efficiency. Table S6 shows the total path lengths, number of edges, and number of path segments for both positive and negative paths. These changes create an “M” pattern, with the peak at LMCI aligning with connectomics analysis results, indicating that the largest change occurs at this stage. After normalizing path lengths by the number of segments, the difference falls within the interval [−0.0039, 0.0047]. This indicates that the magnitude of the shortest paths for positive and negative tend to balance each other by changing the number of edges or segments to compensate for the changes in the path lengths with disease stage. 3.4 Region set enrichment analysis RSEA was performed at three levels: whole brain, clustered regions by significance, and clustered regions by connectomics modules. The whole‐brain analysis (Figure S5 ) shows FSEC variations across all stages. For EMCI and MCI, most FSEC exhibit increases compared to CN, suggesting a relative higher metabolic demand. For MCI, FSEC (five for males and three for females) decreased compared to CN. For example, decreases in metabolic demand appear in modules encoding for memory and emotions. In AD, there is an increase in the number of FSECs that exhibited decreases, except for motor FSEC, which show an increased metabolic demand relative to CN throughout the disease spectrum. Additionally, auditory senses, memory, and language FSECs display significant decrease relative to CN for both sexes in AD. RSEA over regions clustered by significance (Figure S6 ) revealed a finer level of detail of the changes across the disease spectrum. Performing the analysis in this manner makes it possible to see how regions within each cluster contribute to SE categories. In EMCI and MCI for both sexes, the changes within each cluster are largely positive, indicating an increase in metabolic demand. In contrast, for LMCI and AD, the alterations are predominantly decreasing within each module, indicating a decline in brain FSECs. For example, in the case of the memory FSEC, which is associated with cognitive loss in AD, there is an increase within cluster number relative to CN in the early stages. At later stages, this FSEC directionally decreases, which is related to a decline in key brain functions. Lastly, for AD, the FSEC for memory was significant in seven out of eight possible categories (75% males and 100% females). Lastly, RSEA of clustered regions by modules (Figure 3 ) provides deeper insight into these changes. It shows different alteration levels in each cluster and reveals distinct patterns that ultimately lead to similar outcomes: a decline in auditory senses, cognitive abilities, memory, and language FSEC, with an increase in motor FSEC in AD, for both sexes. This suggests that regions follow different trajectories during disease by module and sex, which can be quantified using this method. FIGURE 3 Region set enrichment analysis (RSEA) performed by clustering the regions using the cognitively normal (CN) modules for each sex. RSEA performed using the modules obtained from performing the multiresolution consensus clustering on the CN cases reveals different alteration levels in each cluster and distinct patterns that ultimately lead to similar outcomes obtained in the previous analysis: a decline in auditory senses, cognitive abilities, memory, and language, accompanied by an increase in motor functions, in both sexes. By performing the analysis by modules, we gain a deeper insight into these changes, enabling a better comprehension of these alterations. 3.5 Transcriptomics analysis Gene expression changes in a system‐level framework were identified through WGCNA from the blood transcriptome, with 28 distinct modules of co‐expressed genes (Figure S7 ). To assess functional significance, each of these modules was correlated to the average z ‐scores of FDG, sex, and disease stage (MCI/AD) of the subjects (Figure 4 ). We identified two modules significantly associated with MCI ( p &lt; 0.05) (shown in sienna3, lightgreen), four modules significantly associated with AD ( p &lt; 0.05) (brown4, red, pink, saddlebrown), and one module significantly associated with FDG ( p &lt; 0.05) (brown4) (Figure S7 ). Although grey60 was not significantly associated with FDG or AD and showed only nominal significance with MCI ( p &lt; 0.1), it exhibited substantial change in the lipid and mitochondrial metabolism biological domains, warranting further investigation. Hence, from all the listed modules, we will focus the analysis on the modules that contain biological domains associated with metabolic changes (MCs): red, sienna3, brown4, and grey60 (Figure 4A ). FIGURE 4 WGCNA module–trait associations and functional characterization of Alzheimer's disease (AD)‐related gene modules. (A) Heatmap showing correlations between WGCNA‐identified gene modules and traits including average z‐scores of 2‐Deoxy‐2‐[18F] fluoroglucose ( 18 F‐FDG) uptake, AD status, mild cognitive impairment (MCI) status, and sex. The red module is significantly associated with AD ( p &lt; 0.05), the sienna3 module with FDG ( p &lt; 0.1) and MCI ( p &lt; 0.05), and the grey60 module with MCI ( p = 0.1). All three modules show associations with sex ( p &lt; 0.1). (B) Dot plot showing Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analysis results (adjusted p &lt; 0.1) for genes in the red and sienna3 modules. (C) Bar plot showing enriched AD‐related biological domains and resident Gene Ontology (GO) terms in the red module gene set. Each bar represents the strength of enrichment, measured by the odds ratio (OR) and the statistical significance ( p value). (D) Network visualization of hub genes within each enriched biological domain in red module. (E) Heatmap of log fold change values for hub genes in MCI and AD cases compared to sex‐matched controls. (F) Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) results for red module genes in MCI male, MCI female, AD male, and AD female subgroups are shown with normalized enrichment scores (NESs). Each point is a GO term within the indicated biological domain, the size of the point is scaled by the GSEA adjusted p value, and the NES indicates if the GO term is up‐ or downregulated. Enriched GO terms for the red module identified enrichment in oxygen, carbon dioxide, and gas transport, as well as hydrogen peroxide and porphyrin‐containing compound metabolic processes. On the other hand, the sienna3 module identified enrichment in B‐cell receptor, antigen receptor‐mediated, and immune response‐activating cell surface receptor signaling pathways, B‐cell proliferation, and B‐cell activation (Figure 4B ). Next, we evaluated the enrichment of biological domains within MC modules (Figures 4C–F , 5 , and S8 ) and found that GO terms associated with lipid and mitochondrial metabolism, oxidative stress, proteostasis, and synapse biological domains were significantly enriched ( p &lt; 0.05). By examining the biological domains of each module, we highlight the following changes: mitochondrial metabolism and membrane organization (red, grey60), lysosome (brown4), lipid metabolism (red, sienna3), fatty acid metabolic process (red, grey60), Golgi organization (red, grey60, brown4), endoplasmic reticulum (red, grey60, brown4), synapse (red, sienna3, grey60, brown4), immune response (sienna3, grey60, brown4), metal ion binding and structural stabilization (grey60, brown4), and cytokines (brown4). For a complete list of changes, see Figures 4C–F , 5 , and S8 . These biological domains are heavily related to cellular homeostasis, cellular regulating processes, cellular signaling, and cellular synthesis, with dysregulation linked to neurodegenerative disorders. For example, cytokine dysregulation is linked to chronic inflammation, autoimmune disorders, and impaired immune response; endoplasmic reticulum dysregulation is linked to metabolic disorders, increased oxidative stress, and disruption of lipid metabolism. FIGURE 5 Functional characterization of mild cognitive impairment (MCI)‐ and Alzheimer's Disease (AD)‐ associated WGCNA modules sienna3 and grey60. Bar plot showing enriched Alzheimer's disease (AD)‐related biological domains and resident Gene Ontology (GO) terms in (A) sienna3 module and (E) grey60 gene set. Each bar represents the strength of enrichment, measured by the odds ratio (OR) and the statistical significance ( p value). Network visualization of hub genes within each enriched biological domain in (B) sienna3 and (F) grey60 module. Heatmap of log fold change values for (C) sienna3 and (G) grey60 module hub genes in MCI and AD cases compared to sex‐matched controls. GSEA results for (D) sienna3 module genes and (H) grey60 module genes in MCI male, MCI female, AD male, and AD female subgroups. Each point is a GO term within indicated biological domain, the point size is scaled by the gene set enrichment analysis adjusted p value, and the normalized enrichment score indicates if the GO term is up‐ or downregulated. 3.6 Clinical cognitive assessment Table S7 presents the results of Pearson's correlation between the connectomics metrics and CCA scores. When comparing these measures, positive nodal strength was identified as the connectomics metric with significant correlations relative to various task scores of each CCA. The relationship was positively correlated within the range of 0.5862 to 0.8779. Other connectomics metrics such as density, degrees, clustering, and negative nodal strengths also exhibited positive correlations with CCA scores (Table S7 ). In contrast, the number of path segments and path lengths displayed a tendency toward negative correlations relative to CCA scores. By examining Table S7 in detail, the results suggest that the most significant ( p &lt; 0.05) correlated CCA scores for each assessment are as follows: ADAS‐Cog's Q1 (Word Recall), Q2 (Commands), Q4 (Delayed Word Recall), Q8 (Word Recognition), and Q13 (Number Cancellation) scores; CDR's CRORIENT and CRCARE; and MoCA's categories Visuospatial/Executive, Naming, Attention, Delayed Recall, and Orientation. These results suggest that connectomics‐derived metrics primarily covary with cognitive items tapping episodic memory, attention, executive control, and orientation tasks. This finding points to an emphasis on CCA scores that evaluate memory, executive‐attentional control, and orientation tasks regardless of the cognitive instrument used. 4 DISCUSSION By analyzing the network‐level metabolic metrics, it was observed that their values showed an oscillation between AD stages (Figure 1A–E ). For instance, network density and degree distribution for both sexes follow a “W” pattern, where there is a decrease in values followed by an increase (Figure 1B ). This indicates that the brain undergoes restructuring (i.e., number of connections and how these nodes are connected) as the disease progresses, consistent with brain metabolic reprogramming theory. 3 Additionally, evaluating the clustering coefficient and nodal strength shows that nodes become more decentralized as the disease progresses (Figure 1C–E ), suggesting alterations in the energy‐dependent connectivity networks related to disease progression. Finally, these data also suggest changes in the efficiency of communication between regions, which was observed in the EMCI and LMCI stages, where functional path lengths increased (Figure 2 ). Importantly, these changes are consistent with a recent study, which constructed the individual metabolic network from 18 F‐FDG PET images and showed patterns of occipital‐parietal/temporal regional connectivity deficits that differentiated AD disease groups. Moreover, consistent with the current study, they also showed reductions in global efficiency and clustering coefficients across the AD spectrum. 40 Similarly, an assessment of changes in the WTNs reveals that these networks become increasingly sparse as the disease progresses (Figure 1F–O ). Consistent with these changes, analysis of MRCC modules indicates that the number and region composition within each module vary across the disease spectrum. Notably, males and females exhibit different patterns: In males, the number of modules decreases (indicating network collapse), whereas in females, the number of modules increases (indicating a more fractured network), suggesting sexual dimorphism in metabolic brain modules with disease state. Importantly, these changes are consistent with our previous reports in mouse models of AD, 8 illustrating the universality of this approach. Collectively, these findings suggest that brain regions prune network paths as the disease advances, which is consistent with preclinical and clinical assessments, 41 , 42 where the brain undergoes restructuring in an attempt to maintain normal functions. 3 , 10 , 11 , 17 In this study, positive network changes are interpreted as excitatory activity of neuronal firing, while negative network activity represents inhibitor activity of neuronal firing, effectively dampening neural activity and regulating excitatory activity to prevent disorders like epilepsy or anxiety. 43 Importantly, regulating excitation/inhibition (E/I) balance in the brain is crucial for maintaining proper neural function, regulating information processing, and preventing excessive or inadequate neural activity. 44 In this context, positive and negative covariance paths in metabolic covariance matrices represent excitatory and inhibitory signals, respectively, since positive entries represent synchronized positive correlations between brain regions, while negative entries indicate an inverse relationship, aligning with inhibitory signals. Under these conditions, positive and negative paths (Figure 2 ) should be minimized to avoid an E/I imbalance that leads to pathophysiological states. 43 , 45 We also observe variations in the number of paths, path lengths, and edge counts across the ADRD spectrum; however, the difference between the ratios of positive and negative path lengths and their corresponding number of segments remains constant. This observation aligns with the brain energy failure 19 and reorganization 3 theories, which state that under bioenergetic stress, the brain will attempt to support energy demands by performing fuel switching; however, under extreme loads the brain will be forced to reorganize brain networks to continue to support normal function. 15 , 16 Comparison of the distances between pairwise regions reveals a decrease in distances in MCI, consistent with the aforementioned theories. This decrease in path length implies an increase in efficiency in the network, which is associated with an increased metabolic activity (hypermetabolism) in the brain, while a decrease in path length is associated with a loss of efficiency as the brain begins to fail (hypometabolism). The current connectomics and path analysis suggests that in the transition from EMCI to MCI, the brain increases its metabolic demand in support of increasing pathophysiology. By contrast, during the transition from MCI to LMCI is when energetic demand exceeds the functional reserve, 46 , 47 , 48 leading to network failure and brain metabolic instability. 4 , 6 , 49 Importantly, these network behaviors align with previous reports 8 , 13 and the underlying gene networks and associated biodomains encoding for lipid and mitochondrial metabolism, oxidative stress, proteostasis, and synapse domains (Figures 4 and 5 ), which describe the metabolic alterations in the critical brain regime hypothesis, 50 and suggest that optimal brain function occurs near a phase transition (an intermediate stage where neuronal networks shift between different activity states, enhancing information processing and adaptability). 45 Moreover, this extended critical regime phase (also referred to as Griffith's phase, a phase where neuronal networks exhibit critical‐like properties for an extended period of time) 51 is associated with AD due to excessive excitation correlated to hypersynchronization and cognitive decline. 11 , 51 Importantly, the network connectivity changes observed are supported by gene signatures that encode biodomains, which we 4 and others 49 , 52 have shown closely track endophenotypes and disease stage. To explore these changes in the context of brain function, RSEA permits quantification of changes in FSECs relative to a reference group. This novel method allows us to examine how metabolic alterations between each phase impact various FSEC values. Across all levels of whole‐brain analysis, motor, memory, and language FSECs were significant across the ADRD spectrum (Figures 3 , S5 , and S6 ). In an effort to provide additional refinement of the FSEC changes through ADRD progression, RSEA was applied to MRCC modules. For instance, significant cognitive FSEC changes were observed at the module level across the disease spectrum (Figure 3 ), but they are not discernible at the whole‐brain level (Figure S5 ). Moreover, RSEA matrices predominantly exhibit increases relative to CN in the early stages, but this trend was reversed during the later stages of the disease, and these variantions align with clinical variations in metabolism and cognitive decline described in the AD population. 10 , 11 , 18 , 19 Transcriptomic analysis supports our findings by identifying alterations in lipid and mitochondrial metabolism, oxidative stress, proteostasis, and synapse (Figures 4 , 5 , and S8 ). At a more granular level, these cellular changes were shown to be associated with neurodegenerative disorders. For example, lipid, mitochondrial, and fatty acid metabolism changes may indicate a shift in the metabolic processes within cells, often reflecting a move from normal metabolic homeostasis toward alternative pathways that are less efficient or more damaging to cellular health. 53 , 54 Moreover, lysosome alterations may lead to Aβ accumulation due to impaired clearance, 55 mitochondrial dysfunction, 56 increased oxidative stress, 56 and chronic inflammation, 57 which aligns with the metabolic reprogramming theory. 3 Dysregulation in Golgi organization and structural stabilization may suggest impairment of neuronal physiology due to the deficits in protein processing, 58 stress signaling, 59 and microtubule and vesicular transport impairment 58 ; although these processes may be independent, collectively they may contribute to disease progression and not be just a byproduct of cell death. 58 , 59 Cytokines are signaling proteins secreted by immune cells (i.e., microglia, macrophages, astrocytes) that are important in mediating and regulating immune and inflammatory responses and maintaining central nervous system homeostasis. Hence, cytokine dysregulation activates microglia, which release pro‐inflammatory cytokines (i.e., TNFα, IL1β, IL6) as an initial/acute protective response, 60 but chronic activation leads to chronic neuroinflammation, 60 which is a central mechanism underlying neurodegenerative progression. 60 Lastly, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) serves a role in protein folding, calcium homeostasis, and quality control within neurons. However, when the ER is under stress or remains dysfunctional, as in AD, it can lead to the accumulation of misfolded proteins (i.e., Aβ, hyperphosphorylated tau tangles). This accumulation overwhelms the ER's capacity, and contributes to the onset and progression of AD, 61 , 62 which aligns with the energy failure 19 and metabolic reprogramming theories. 3 To relate our connectomics and shortest‐path findings with CCA, we performed covariate analysis, which revealed that the current analysis retained the ability to assess disease changes that may be beyond the ability of CCA tests to detect disease early. This disconnect could be attributed to the fact that the behavior across the disease spectrum exhibits a non‐linear relationship with CCA response, which is a limitation of CCA scores. 63 Hence, connectomics and shortest‐path analysis may provide a complementary analysis to CCA. One important limitation of this study is that the analysis was conducted at a macro level, as we analyzed unilateral regional data, which might have caused us to overlook bilateral changes and reveal more profound changes. Additionally, these limitations may affect the shortest path length analysis, because these covariance matrices do not directly represent synaptic connection but rather describe statistical interdependencies. Furthermore, this study was conducted using a single imaging modality, and to encompass the entire disease spectrum, multimodal imaging should be considered, which highlights the need for integrated multimodal brain connectomics modeling approaches. In conclusion, this study demonstrated the value of analyzing metabolic alterations using connectomics and path length metrics. The results from these metrics support the idea that the brain undergoes a network reorganization as a compensatory mechanism of pathological disruption. Moreover, path lengths between brain regions change as AD advances, decreasing in MCI but increasing in AD. This suggests a decrease in the efficiency of the connectivity network, which may contribute to cognitive decline. RSEA revealed significant functional changes in motor, memory, language, and cognition, highlighting the impact of these metabolic variations on the subject's FSECs. Integrating multimodal data will be critical for developing a more comprehensive framework that captures metabolic, functional, and structural changes, thereby providing deeper insights into disease progression and potential therapeutic targets. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Juan Antonio K. Chong Chie contributed to the study design, data collection and management, data analysis and interpretation, data quality assessment, literature review, and manuscript drafting. Scott A. Persohn participated in study design, data collection and management, data analysis, and quality assessment. Ravi S. Pandey provided transcriptomics analysis and interpretation and helped write the manuscript. Gregory Carter supervised the analysis of the transcriptomic data done by Ravi S. Pandey. Olivia R. Simcox did a literature search for functional analysis of the brain regions. Paul Salama provided statistical and image analysis advice, participated in data interpretation, and helped write the manuscript. Paul R. Territo contributed to study design, data analysis and interpretation, and helped write the manuscript. Juan Antonio K. Chong Chie, Paul R. Territo, and Scott A. Persohn had access to all raw data. Ravi S. Pandey had access to raw genetic data. Juan Antonio K. Chong Chie, Paul R. Territo, and Scott A. Persohn verified the data and results. All authors helped revise the manuscript. All authors had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication. CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT All authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest to disclose. Author disclosures are available in the Supporting Information . CONSENT STATEMENT All participants provided written informed consent under protocols approved by ADNI‐affiliated Institutional Review Boards. De‐identified data were obtained from the ADNI database in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and ADNI ethical guidelines. ETHICS STATEMENT Ethics approval was not required for this study. Supporting information Supporting Information Supporting Information Supporting Information Supporting Information Supporting Information